DATE WITH ROMANCE. 14 October 1939.
Mrs. Ramsay dressed for her lunch with Gerald Spalding in a mood of fine old nostalgia, well crusted on the top and five years in the wood. It took her some time to decide what to wear. After a good deal of thought she chose the navy alpaca suit with a crisp lingerie blouse, for that made her look very trim and she remembered Gerald had once said she seemed to go around protected by invisible cellophane. Mrs. Ramsay felt that it would be tragic for Gerald to sit in Malaya for five years thinking about a woman in London who looked as though she were protected by invisible cellophane and then be faced with someone limp as a wilted lettuce in crumpled chiffon. The hat was a bit of a problem. Used to women skulking about under double terais, Gerald would possibly shy back in alarm from an old love glimmering at him like a submerged oyster through layers of chenille fishnet or making an Ophelia-like entrance under a haystack of pansies. There was nothing in Mrs. Ramsay’s cupboard that seemed to hit the note, so she went out early for her lunch date and picked up en route a quiet, ladylike little number with a touch of near-widowish melancholy in the veil. She also dropped in for a manicure. Gerald had always been rather foolish about her hands, she remembered.
At Gerald’s club, the hall porter informed Mrs. Ramsay, in discreet confidential tones which made her feel like a naughty Ouida lady visiting a man’s chambers, that Mr. Spalding had not yet arrived. The porter then came out from his dog kennel and smuggled her into a room full of imitation Chippendale furniture and genuine Sheraton members uneasily entertaining female period pieces to a glass of sherry. Mrs. Ramsay sat down on a brocaded sofa, and presently Gerald came hurrying in, fumbling with his ‘gas-mask carton and looking harassed.
‘I'm most awfully sorry,’ he said. ‘I got kept at the doctor's.’
‘Gerald, dear,’ said Mrs. Ramsay softly. She held out both her hands, which Gerald pumped up and down. ‘Well, well,’ he said, ‘old Helen.’ Mrs. Ramsay felt a slight but definite chill. Not noticing that the atmosphere of the tender moment had fallen several degrees, Gerald dropped her hands and sat down.
“What'll you have?’ he asked.
Mrs. Ramsay thought she would take a glass of dry sherry. Gerald ordered a whisky-and-soda for himself. “You get into the habit of stengahs in Malaya,’ he said. ‘Well, chin-chin.’ They drank and gazed at each other, smiling. ‘Old Helen,’ Gerald repeated fatuously. ‘This is nice.’ Mrs. Ramsay noted coldly that he was a good deal yellower than he had been five years ago. ‘How is old Charles?” he asked. ‘And the kiddie? By Jove, she was only a spot of a thing when I was home on leave last.’
Mrs. Ramsay said that old Charles was well and that old Susan had, of course, been shipped off to relatives in the country. ‘But I don’t want to talk about them, I want to talk about you,’ she said. ‘I want to hear all your news, Gerald.’
He patted her knee absently, as though it were the head of a retriever. ‘Before we start, how about some chow?’ he said.
Settled in a dim, panelled corner of the dining-room, Gerald seemed to glow richly, like some citrus fruit. His sombre eye lightened for a moment as he watched Mrs. Ramsay toying prettily with the menu. ‘You've still got lovely hands, Helen,’ he said, in a tone which implied that everything else had gone pretty much to rack and ruin. He ordered steamed fish and Melba toast for himself. ‘I have to be careful about diet,’ he said. ‘It’s my stomach. I told you I'd come straight from the doctor’s this morning.’
Mrs. Ramsay said that she did hope it was nothing serious.
Gerald assured her, with a kind of melancholy pride, that it was. ‘It’s partly the East, I suppose — dysentery and all that— and partly anno Domini too, probably. We're not as young as we were, Helen.’ He did some more retriever-patting under the table.
Mrs. Ramsay, wondering if the kneecap would emit a loud creak, said fretfully that she personally felt very well.
’“Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale her infinite variety,” Gerald said loyally. ‘By Jove, look at that girl’s hat!’ He turned round to crane after an elderly colonel escorting an attractive niece to the door. Gerald said that women’s hats were the craziest things he’d seen in years, but that some of these kids could get away with it and look pretty cute. ‘Now, I knew you'd be wearing a sensible hat,’ he said. Mrs. Ramsay smiled wanly.
With difficulty escaping from Gerald’s stomach, which seemed to pursue the conversation like some particularly active octopus, they chatted about theatres. Gerald said there was nothing like a good show and he hoped the London producers would carry on, as they promised, in spite of the war. He supposed that in the East he missed a good show more than anything else. Then he told about some awfully jolly theatricals someone had got up in Singapore. Towards the end of lunch he extracted a snapshot from his cigarette case and, flushing a startling shade of burnt sienna, passed it over to Mrs. Ramsay. ‘What do you think of it?’ he said. Mrs. Ramsay gazed thoughtfully at a toothy young woman in a bathing suit perched at the edge of a swimming-pool. ‘Strictly under the punkah, we're thinking of getting married,’ Gerald explained. He said that they had met on the boat coming home and that her name was Monica. ‘Of course, she’s heard everything about you,’ he said. “You'll love old Helen,” I told her. She’s only a kid, really. Her husband was a brute - used to come home from the club stinking and knock her about in front of the servants and all that.’
Mrs. Ramsay reflected that his aim must have been indifferent, for Monica’s front teeth seemed many more than were strictly usual. She passed the snapshot back to Gerald and said briskly that she was so glad.
‘In spite of all she’s been through, she’s the youngest thing you ever saw,’ said Gerald.
‘Isn't that nice?’ said Mrs. Ramsay. She felt that age had withered and custom staled Gerald’s infinite variety considerably, and she improvised an early appointment at the hairdresser’s.
“Monica can sit on her hair,’ said Gerald. ‘You never saw such stuff — naturally blond, too.’
Mrs. Ramsay, deciding that she would find no difficulty in sitting on Monica’s hair either if Monica’s head were included, said that she really must be running along now.
At the last moment, Gerald seemed inclined to be sentimental. ‘I want you to meet Monica soon,’ he said. ‘Do you know what attracted me about her first, Helen? She
As soon as she was out of sight round the corner, Mrs. Ramsay took out her handbag mirror and anxiously inspected her teeth. They seemed much as usual and more or less under control. For a while she felt a little low; then, as she crossed the street, she caught sight of her reflection in a shop window and she couldn’t help observing how nice she looked in the navy alpaca suit. It was odd how Gerald had changed when she herself looked precisely the way she had always looked. Poor Gerald, thought Mrs. Ramsay. Already she felt a good deal cellophane, away from the dear and mercifully stone-dead past.