FIN DE SIECLE 12 July 1941
It wasn’t necessary for Don Merrill to join up; the Ministry of Labour and National Service hadn't called his age group yet. But with the Merrills it was less a question of heroics than of eating or not eating. Because of the war, no one seemed anxious to buy Don’s pictures or to let Ernestine design a room. Even if people had the money to spare, they didn’t want to spend it on things which, experience had shown, were subject to splintering and mangling. People wanted to buy something solid, a few acres of ground on which to raise chickens and pigs and grow food to eat. ‘Safe as houses’ was a maxim which meant nothing nowadays with the dust drifting round London, fine brick dust that got in the eyes and made women’s black clothes look grey and unfresh. Don went into the Army because he couldn’t think what else to do.
Ernestine Merrill had never expected to find herself a soldier's wife. She and Don had both been ardent pacifists right up to Munich, and they had often made disparaging remarks about the military caste. Now here she was, drawing her wife’s allowance every week at the post office and liking it. It was wonderful to be able to go out and buy a chop and pay for it instead of getting it on tick because some bitch of a woman hadn't yet paid for having her dining-room done over from Regency to Ernestine Merrill. When she first saw Don in khaki it was a shock, certainly. During peacetime his tastes ran to tough, richly coloured shirts and hairy neckties of peasant inspiration. In his uniform he looked drab as a sparrow, all buttoned up and slicked down.
At first he made little jokes about his new life. It was rather like going back to school, really, he wrote to her. You did what you were told, you ate and slept at regular hours, you began to get keen about all sorts of idiotic things. When he was singled out for a commission, it became apparent that the keenness was real, not ironic. The first few times she heard him talking about ‘we’ it took her a moment or two to realise that he didn’t mean the calm domestic ‘we, Don and Ernestine, but the regiment to which he was going to be attached. Already he had identified himself with it.
He finished his officer-cadet training course and came up to London for seven days’ leave before being posted to his unit. On the surface, their life for that week reverted to normal. They got up late, dressed leisurely, and went out every night. The studio, which had acquired a chilly, almost virginal air while Don was away, once more became human with his clothing scattered about, the smell of his pipe and of male food cooking. Ernestine had not realised how bored she was with the scrappy feminine trays she had been languidly fixing for herself.
Picking up the telephone one night, Don said, ‘Let's get hold of everyone. I want to talk. God, how I want to talk!’
It was difficult to get a few friends together nowadays - quite ridiculously difficult: The war had a frightening way of making them vanish into thin air. You dialled a number and the phone rang and rang until someone beside you said ‘Didn't you know? She's taken the children to New York’ or ‘Aren't they in Cornwall?’ or, rather thoughtfully, ‘Of course, it was a bad blitz last night.’ The Merrills’ crowd had been entirely split up. Paul Hathaway, who used to run the precious little Ulysses Press, was a fighter pilot. Elliot Quinn was toting a Home Guard rifle with retired Tory generals in the intervals of his censorship job. Linda was a nurse. Before the war she had been fashion editor of a glossy weekly, going to all the Paris collections, always looking the picture of what more timid women would do their best to look like next season. It was funny seeing her in her unbecoming nurse's cap, her nails short and without varnish. Little Jimmy Shaw, who had shared a house with the Merrills one painting summer near Auxerre, had been killed in action. The list could go on indefinitely. All over London telephone bells were ringing angrily through empty rooms over which the fine brick dust, seeping in at shuttered windows, was beginning to settle.
Most of all, thought Ernestine, the talk for which Don seemed so hungry was different. There was no conversation that wasn't about the war. People talked only of themselves, their jobs, their bombs, their version of Don’s new ‘we’. She tried to remember what they had talked about before the war. She couldn't. All those good evenings belonged now to the sociologists, the scholars of the future browsing among the remains of the doomed thirties. She wondered if Don felt the same, but he didn’t say anything. In the end they went out to dinner alone. Familiar faces, strange over unfamiliar uniforms, swam into focus through the cigarette haze in the Café Royal. The seven days passed in a flash. She had the feeling that he was really quite pleased to be going back.
After Don left, there seemed to Ernestine to be no point in staying in London, and the next weekend she went down to the country to look for rooms that would be near him. It was a coincidence that Don should be stationed in a place that both he and Ernestine knew well. They had often stayed with Walter and Miriam Brady in the white house that Walter had built on a hill where it could be plainly seen, flashing in the sun, an airy glass insult to the spinsters and the retired colonels of the valley as they looked through their leaded Tudor panes. The house had been a centre for the Merrills’ crowd in the old days, but the Bradys weren’t there any more. The war had finished Walter's profession as it had finished Don’s and Ernestine’s. After waiting about for some time in the queue of well-known architects who were hoping for government jobs, he had joined the Air Force and Miriam had taken the boy to Australia. They were two of the friends who had simply vanished.
‘Now I know what was wrong with my leave,’ Don said. “Walter wasn’t there to talk to. I'd have liked to talk to Walter.’
It was his first admission, Ernestine noticed, that anything at all had been wrong with his leave.
“You won't be bored, because all the other wives are down here too,’ he had said when he met her at the train. She looked at him cautiously. Remarks which six months ago would have been meant ironically were often quite serious now, and she didn’t want to laugh when she wasn’t supposed to. His face was unsmiling.
‘I'm longing to meet them,’ she said.
She had brought down a lot of khaki wool and she sat with Don in the little bar of the local pub, knitting a pullover, like all the other women. She hadn’t knitted for years and she was slow at it, but it seemed to be the right thing to do. ‘Oh, that pattern!’ the wives would say cosily, dropping into a neighbouring chair. ‘I’ve just done it for Jim. You'll find ita bit of a beast when you come to the neck.’ The pub was full of regiment and so was the village, but there were still one or two cottages they might try for rooms, the landlord said as he passed Don's beer and Ernestine’s sherry over the counter. ‘One of them must be very near the Bradys’ place,’ Don said.
“Mr. Brady?’ said the landlord. ‘Ah, he’s gone now. In the Air Force, so they tell me.’
“Yes, the last I heard, he was in Egypt,’ said Don.
The landlord didn’t seem very communicative. Maybe, Ernestine suggested as they finished their drinks and went out, maybe Walter had gone away owing him money. Don said he wouldn't be surprised. It would be more surprising to find someone to whom Walter didn’t owe money. They laughed as they thought of him, in his shocking old sweater and sailcloth trousers, going into the pub as though he owned it, shouting for the landlord, and taking away gin and beer for the houseful of thirsty weekend guests.
‘Remember that last weekend?’ said Ernestine. ‘Linda and Jimmy were there. We were all sun-bathing on the terrace and Jimmy was painting Miriam. Remember? It must have been the August just before the war.’
“We might go and look at the house on our way,’ Don said. ‘I wonder if it’s been bought yet. I forgot to ask.”
The first thing they saw as they came round the corner of the familiar lane was a big board, ‘For Sale’. Across it a smaller board said despondently, ‘No reasonable offer refused’. Don stopped the car.
‘Let’s take a walk round now,’ he said. “We can go and ask about the rooms afterwards. It’s probably those cottages just across the way.”
A man was working in one of the cottage gardens, digging a piece of ground among the apple trees. He stopped working and watched them as they pushed open Walter’s gate and walked up the drive. Ernestine was feeling fine because it was a nice day and she was with Don. She looked at him out of the corner of her eye and thought how well and how young he looked in his new uniform. For years he had looked permanently worried. Anxiety had settled in fine lines round his eyes and lips, but now he was tanned and contented, with the contentment of a man who knows where his next meal and a whole settled future of next meals are coming from. Ernestine slipped her hand under his arm, and he looked at her and smiled.
‘Poor old Walter,’ he said.
She had not been thinking of Walter, and now she looked guiltily at Walter's house. She told herself that all houses empty for a long time had that same sordid and derelict air. But Walter’s house seemed especially forlorn. It looked like something left over from an exhibition, a section of some démodé World’s Fair that people would presently come and take down and cart away. They walked round the terrace and peered through the enormous sliding glass walls that Walter had built in defiance of this windy country and the English climate. There was dust on the shining black composition floors; spiders had established a colony in the specially heated vitrines where Miriam had kept her tropical plants.
‘It looks funny without the Dufy on that wall,’ Ernestine said.
‘It looks funniest of all without Walter,’ Don said. As if by agreement, they straightened up and walked rapidly down the drive, not looking back.
Yes, Ernestine thought, it’s funniest of all without Walter. And without Miriam and Linda and Elliot, Paul and Jimmy and the rest of them. They had gone, and the integrity, the personality of the house had splintered like matchwood. Nobody knew where Walter was. He might be dead. Jimmy was dead, and so were Peter Nash and Nicholas. David had gone to California in the rout of the intellectuals. Lovely Linda was dosing tubercular clerks with cough mixture in a Brixton cellar. Going back to Walter’s house had been like visiting a cemetery where there were no tidy tombstones recording beginnings and endings but only question marks over the graves. She looked at Don to see if his flesh was creeping too, and decided that he was thinking of something else. He looked at the view appraisingly as he shut the gate.
‘We're having a three-day exercise over this area next week,’ he said. ‘Tanks and the whole works. It’s grand country for tanks.’
‘It must be, darling,’ she said.
The man digging in the garden opposite had come up to his hedge and was leaning on his spade, waiting for them. ‘If you're wanting the key, the agent at Sarumcester has it,’ he said.
“We don’t want the key,’ said Don. ‘We were just having a look around.’
‘The man wiped his face with the back of his hand and nodded cheerfully. He looked Don up and down. ‘Ah, it’s not the sort of place you'd like, sir,’ he said. ‘There’s many as stops to look, out of curiosity, you might say, but they never wants the key. Who'd be wanting an outlandish place as that is? A regular landmark it is to the bombers, shouldn't wonder, standing out on the hilltop so white and flashing. See it miles off, young fellow in the Air Force tells my son.’
‘It could be camouflaged,’ Don said.
‘Ah, it could be,’ the man said dubiously. ‘But then, think of the blackout, sir! That's what a gentleman who comes to look at it says to me. “Think of all that glass and the blackout,” he says. Oh no, it wouldn't do for you and the lady, sir. A funny bunch used to be there — a Mr. Brady and his friends down from London. Yes, a regular funny bunch.’ He looked at Don again, friendly and respectful, his blue eyes smiling as they glanced over the spick-and-span uniform. “They weren't your sort at all, sir. Notat all.’
Ernestine looked at Don. He was smiling too. She waited for him to explain that they were friends of the Bradys and knew the house well. But instead, he said in a brisk, pleasant voice, ‘As a matter of fact, we're not house-hunting at all. We're trying to find a billet for my wife. Perhaps you can tell us where Mrs. Coombes lives?’