LITERARY SCANDAL AT THE SEWING PARTY 6 September 1941
Mrs. Ramsay’s Red Cross sewing party did not often stray from the realities of life as they sat in her dining-room stitching pyjamas and assembling the component parts of an elaborate winceyette octopus known as a many-tail bandage. The conversation rarely touched on other topics than the gossip of the little Sussex village, which Mrs. Ramsay had once innocently looked upon as a sleepy hamlet where nothing ever happened. She was now considerably better educated. Sometimes she shivered slightly at the ease with which the ladies kept themselves informed of what was going on beneath every picturesque roof in the place, from the humblest cottage up to the Manor. Mrs. Peters, the wife of the head groom at the big house, seemed to be able to tell whena young wife was ‘expecting’ even before the young woman had realised it herself, and she had an equally uncomfortable knack of recognising what was sepulchrally termed ‘the look’ on a doomed person’s face. Occasionally Mrs. Ramsay felt that she was sitting in at a sewing bee of the Fates, all busy with shears and thread, snipping ata life here, twining two strands with a knowing cackle there.
Every now and then, however, the conversation reached a more intellectual level. It was on one of these afternoons that Mrs. Twistle dropped her bombshell. She did it gently, for everything about Mrs. Twistle, who had been in ducal service as a girl, was gentle except her opinions, which were frequently of a startling violence. ‘When the voice of the people is heard, then, Madam, if you'll excuse me saying so, there’s gentlemen in the present government as will find theirselves facing a firing squad’ was one of the utterances that Mrs. Ramsay always found a trifle macabre issuing from the lips of a dovelike individual with pink cheeks and an Alexandra fringe.
The afternoon had begun with a little mild chatter about how much better it was to live in one of the old cottages than in the nasty new boxes the Council was putting up when Mrs. Twistle gave the modest cough which generally preceded her entry into the conversation.
“Talking of old houses,’ she observed to the company in general, ‘reminds me of the old place I was in the first time I ever went out to service, before I was with Her Grace. Oh, it was quaint! Everything was just as it used to be, and the gentleman wouldn't have it modernised on no account. Stella Place was the name of it, over the other side of Foxley Green.’
Mrs. Peters stopped buttonholing. ‘Stella Place!’ she said with a snort. ‘Ow, what a name! Whatever will they think up next? Why not Elsie Place or Maud Place while they’re about it?”
“Well, it was on account of its history, Mrs. Peters,’ said Mrs. Twistle, smiling indulgently. ‘Ever so many years ago a gentleman called Dean Swift murdered a young lady called Stella there.’
Mrs. Ramsay started violently. So did Mrs. Lovelace, who clutched the pince-nez off her nose and stared with horror at Mrs. Twistle’s placid countenance. ‘Murdered,’ she said faintly. ‘How dreadful! If I'd been you, Mrs. Twistle, I shouldn't have been able to sleep a wink in the nasty place.’
‘Us girls, being young and silly, used to fancy that we heard something when we came back late from our half-days out,’ Mrs. Twistle said. ‘Maybe it was the Dean come back, and maybe it wasn’t. Anyway, there was the pore lady’s blood under the rug on the parlour floor. The parlourmaid let me have a peep one day. They'd tried and tried to get the stains out, she said, but nothing would move them.’
“Uman blood,’ Mrs. Garner said. ‘Nothing will move it. 'Ave you ever been to Stone’enge, Mrs. Twistle? Fred and me went there on a charabang trip one Easter Monday. There’s ’uman bloodstains on some of those enormous great stones, so they say, left there by the Druids, and you can’t budge them.’ To Mrs. Ramsay's slightly dazed fancy, Mrs. Garner appeared to be licking her lips.
‘Ow, Druids!’ Mrs. Peters exclaimed scornfully, as though she had always suspected them of being a slovenly lot of creatures who wouldn't think of mopping up afterwards. ‘All I can say is give twenty minutes at Stonehenge with a good, stiffbrush and Vim, and I'd get the place so you wouldn't object to eating your dinner off it.’
‘No doubt you would, Mrs. Peters,’ Mrs. Twistle murmured. ‘But the fact remains that I saw the marks with my own eyes, as distinct as they was, no doubt, on the day when the pore soul was struck down.’
Needles were suspended while the circle gave its heavily breathing attention to the tragedy. Mrs. Dogberry, who was deaf but had somehow had the facts communicated to her in a series of piercing whispers by her neighbours, suddenly shouted, ‘What made Dean bash her, Mrs. Twistle?”
With a meaning glance at Mrs. Lovelace’s unmarried daughter, who was sitting with her mouth open, Mrs. Twistle replied, ‘Some say one thing and some another, Mrs. Dogberry.’
There was a pause, broken by a wild giggle from Elsie Lovelace, whose risible faculties were frequently out of control. Her mother sighed. ‘What a shocking thing!’ she said. ‘I've heard of Dean Swift, now you mention it. A writer, wasn’t he?”
‘Ow, writers!’ cried Mrs. Peters, as though she lumped the profession with the Druids in one disreputable whole.
‘I believe that he wrote the lady letters,’ Mrs. Twistle whispered. ‘Beautiful letters, hundreds and hundreds of them. I fancy they was printed in a book. It does seem sad that after all that the gentleman should have yielded to such a horrid impulse.’
‘Ow, well, perhaps the pore man got tired of waiting for an answer,’ Mrs. Peters said, and snickered. ‘I remember Daddy used to get wild with me’ — the party understood that she was referring to Mr. Peters and not to her paternal ancestor — ‘when I was away in service before we were married and he didn’t have his weekly letter. I suppose he used to wonder if I wasn’t larking with some other boy. Pore Daddy.’
Resisting the impulse to dwell on the vision of Mrs. Peters nubile and larking, Mrs. Ramsay felt that the moment had come to stir from the dreamy trance in which she had been listening and stitching on buttons. ‘I think you must be confusing Dean Swift with someone else, aren’t you, Mrs. Twistle?’ she said. ‘He certainly wrote letters to someone called Stella, and she certainly died fairly young, but I’m afraid’ — she smiled apologetically round the table - ‘I’m afraid quite naturally.’
The faces of the sewing party expressed a struggle between their desire to believe Mrs. Ramsay, who was held to be a model of elegant culture and book learning, and their faith in Mrs. Twistle, who had seen the nasty evidence under the parlour rug.
Mrs. Peters suddenly made up her mind. ‘Ow, of course you're mixing him up, Mrs. Twistle!’ she cried. ‘Why, he was a dean, wasn’t he? Who ever heard of a dean murdering anybody, I'd like to know.’
The others looked thoughtful, as though they were searching their memories for bloody doings at the Deanery. Mrs. Ramsay noted apprehensively that Mrs. ‘Twistle’s shining cheeks were a couple of shades rosier as she said, with deceptive softness, ‘If you'll forgive me for saying so, Mrs. Peters, I consider as how that is a very unfair idea. Because a gentleman is in high places, there’s some people as will never suspect him of doing anything he oughtn’t to. If it were Mr. Peters or Mr. Twistle now, it would be a very different story, no doubt.’
“Ow! Daddy murdering someone! That's a good one, I must say,’ Mrs. Peters said indignantly.
'Mr. Peters is, after all, only flesh and blood, capable of ‘human passions like the rest,’ said Mrs. Twistle.
This was new and fascinating idea to Mrs. Ramsay, who had hitherto been inclined to think of Mr. Peters as a pair of spindly gaiters and a checked cap. Judging from the expression on Mrs. Peters’ face, it was also a new idea to her. She kept a brooding silence for some minutes while the rest of the party sewed furiously and thought of Mr. Peters and human passions.
Mrs. Ramsay was hoping that everything was going to blow over nicely when Mrs. Peters suddenly demanded, ‘If the Dean did murder the lady, Mrs. Twistle, I suppose he was took up for it?”
‘He was not,’ said Mrs. Twistle.
‘Ow, now, that settles it that you’ve got it wrong,’ Mrs. Peters said. ‘Everybody knows that British justice is going to get you if you do a murder, no matter if you’re a dean or Archbishop of Canterbury. Wearing your collar back to front isn’t going to make no difference to British justice, Mrs. Twistle. Ow, no, very definitely not!’
‘Influence, no doubt, Mrs. Peters,’ whispered Mrs. Twistle, calmly enough, but with her Alexandra fringe quivering ominously. ‘Influence has been responsible for saving many a gentleman from the common hangman's grave, as you might say. If it had been Mr. Peters, the noose would have been round his neck before the pore lady was cold.’
Mrs. Ramsay intervened hastily. ‘Dean Swift is buried in St. Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin,’ she said. ‘So I'm afraid that shows, doesn’t it, that you've got things a litle ~
‘With a tablet, I daresay,’ said Mrs. Twistle bitterly. ‘I’m naming no names, but there’s plenty of gentlemen lying snug in Westminster Abbey this minute who ought by rights — excuse me, Madam — to be buried at the crossroads with a stake through their black hearts.’
There was a hysterical yelp from Elsie Lovelace and a shocked ‘My goodness, what a dreadful idea!’ from Mrs. Lovelace, who was fixing a blue striped sleeve into a pink striped armhole in her agitation.
‘Bolshie, I call it,’ said Mrs. Peters, jabbing a needle into her needlecase.
Mrs. Twistle gently patted her fringe. 'As I understand from Mr. Churchill that the Russian gentlemen are now our glorious allies, Mrs. Peters, the term “Bolshie” doesn’t quite imply any longer what I take it you was trying to imply, Mrs. Peters,’ she said.
Mrs. Ramsay was wishing distractedly that the needle- case, with its bristling arsenal winking temptingly, was not still in Mrs, Peters’ hand when Mrs. Dogberry sailed into the conversation. Having long since lost any idea of what everyone else was talking about, she introduced one of her abrupt conversational switches by shouting, ‘Have you heard that little Mrs. Clark up at Tiggs Farm is expecting again?’
In the ensuing cosy chat, which seemed to Mrs. Ramsay to be a nice blend of robust Elizabethan dialogue and a few extracts from the fertility rites of the aboriginals, the previous topic was happily forgotten. And when the sewing party finally put on their hats and creaked out, Mrs. Ramsay was slightly bewildered to see Mrs. Twistle and Mrs. Peters going off up the lane together, apparently on amiable terms and engaged in animated discussion of the best way of keeping colour in gooseberry jam.
 