GOODBYE, MY LOVE 13 December 1941
Adrian’s mother welcomed them as though this were just an ordinary visit, with nothing particular about it. They found her, as they had found her so many times before, working in the big herbaceous border facing the sea, crouching girlishly with a frail little green plant in the palm of one earthy hand. She greeted them abstractedly, pushing back her wispy grey hair with the back of the hand that held the trowel and leaving asmudge. While they talked, Ruth looked at the border, which Adrian had built for his mother on a ledge of the cliff garden, facing it with a paved path beside which the rosemary and the seeded mulleins sprang. Even now, in late autumn, with the sea mist hanging in drops on the spiders’ webs that festooned the last red-hot pokers, it was beautiful. Sometimes Ruth wondered if the cold woman, her mother-in-law, didn’t express some secret frustration in these savage reds and yellows, these sullen purples, which she caused to gush out of the warm Cornish earth.
Ruth was grateful now for the lack of outward emotion which had so often chilled her. When Mrs. Vyner asked Adrian, as they walked back to the house, ‘Which day do you go?’ she might have been asking about some weekend visit he was going to make. He said ‘Wednesday’, and she repeated ‘Wednesday’ in a vague voice, her attention wandering to a bough of japonica which the wind had loosened from the wall they were passing. She sat down on the porch to unlace her shocking old gardening boots.
‘I suppose you don’t know where you're going to be sent,’ she said. ‘I know it has to be very secret nowadays, because of the submarines.’
‘I think it’s Syria,’ Adrian said. ‘From the stuff we’re taking, I’m pretty certain.’
“You can’t be sure,’ Mrs. Vyner said. “There’s a Mrs. Mason who’s come to live at the Cross Glens. You know, Adrian, where old Colonel Fox used to live. Well, Captain Mason went off with a topee and shorts, poor man, and the next thing she heard was that he was sitting up on a fiord in Iceland. It’s all done to put the spies on the wrong track. I'll point Mrs. Mason out to you in church tomorrow.’
Later, when the Rector came in, he made more of an occasion of it than his wife had. He gave Ruth a heartier kiss than usual. ‘It’s good of you to think of the old people when you've got so little time left,’ he said. Ruth disliked the phrase ‘so little time left’. Suddenly she was inordinately conscious of time. The house was full of it, ticking between simpering shepherdesses on the mantelpiece, grumbling out of the tall mahogany case in the hall, nervously stuttering against Adrian’s wrist. The church clock, just across the rectory garden, struck every quarter. Ruth thought, ‘Four days, and one of them nearly gone.’
After dinner the Rector got out The Times atlas and pored over it with Adrian, while Mrs. Vyner sat knitting a sock and talking about the garden and the village. The Rector’s broad thumb, tracing the possible course that a convoy would take out into the Atlantic, swooped down upon the Cape. He and Adrian sounded quiet and contented, as though they were plotting a fishing holiday.
Ruth and her mother-in-law sat knitting a little apart, chatting in low voices.
‘The black spot has been dreadful on the roses this year,’ Mrs. Vyner said. ‘Really dreadful. What do you plan to do after he’s gone?”
‘I shall get a job,’ Ruth said. ‘I thought I might go into one of the services. Shorthand and typing ought to be useful. Anyway, I’m going to do something.’
‘That’s sensible,’ Mrs. Vyner said. ‘After all, you'll be perfectly free, won’t you? It isn’t as though you have any ties.”
‘No, I've got no ties at all,’ Ruth said.
When they were undressing in the big, chilly guest room, she said to Adrian, ‘Somehow, now that you're going I wish we'd had a child. You know, the Sonnets and all that — “And nothing ’gainst Time’s scythe can make defence, Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.”’
‘I'm not sorry,’ Adrian said. “This way I shan’t be missing anything. When I get back we'll have the fun of kids together.’
“Yes, we will,’ Ruth said, raising her voice slightly, as though she were talking to someone behind him. ‘How long do you think the war’s going to last?’ she asked, picking up her hairbrush.
‘Darling! As though it matters a damn what I think. I don’t know — maybe another couple of years or so.’
‘Some people say it will be over next spring.’
‘Some people talk a hell of a lot of nonsense,’ he said.
The bed was a big, old-fashioned double, its mattress divided into two gentle troughs where successive generations of guests had lain. Ruth got in and pulled the covers up to her chin. She watched Adrian moving around the room. ‘They were an awful long time demobilising people after the last war, weren't they?’ she said. ‘Maybe the firm would make a special application for you, or whatever they do. After all, they'll be terribly anxious to get you back. Mr. Hobday told me himself that he didn’t know how they were going to get on without you.’
‘Oh, they'll manage,’ Adrian said.
At intervals all through the night, Ruth kept waking up and listening to the sea. She pictured it running up the jagged inlets of the long, cruel coast, along which she and Adrian had often sailed in his little boat. He was asleep, breathing softly and lightly, his face close to her shoulder. She lay thinking this way until it began to get light and the birds started shouting in Mrs. Vyner’s wild garden.
They went to church next morning, walking through the gate in the yew hedge into the bleak little churchyard. The congregation that had come to hear the Rector preach was small and badly dressed, for the parish was thinly populated and poor. It was easy, without Mrs. Vyner’s whisper, to identify the more prosperous Mrs. Mason, tweedy in a front pew, with a plain little girl on either side. Captain Mason had at least provided her with two defences ’gainst Time’s scythe, hideous though they were in their spectacles and with gold bands round their teeth, before he took himself off to his Icelandic fiords. Ruth looked across the aisle at Mrs. Mason, who was cheerfully singing the Te Deum. ‘I'll get used to it, too,’ she thought. The only other representative of the local gentry in church was Major Collingwood, who read the lessons in a voice beautifully husky with Irish whisky and buttonholed Adrian afterwards in the porch. ‘Well, my boy! Just off, I hear,’ he said. ‘Going East, I suppose? No, no, don’t tell me - mustn’t ask, mustn’t ask. Well, it looks like a big showdown there this winter. Hitler's going to try and break through. Yes, we've got to be prepared for heavy fighting, heavy fighting.’
‘The old fool,’ Ruth thought. She walked away and began reading some of the inscriptions on the crosses of local grey stone at the heads of the few green mounds in the churchyard. Most of the men were fishermen who had been drowned in winter storms along the coast. ‘John Tregarthen, who lost his life off Black Point, 10 December 1897,’ she read. ‘Samuel Cotter, drowned in the wreck of the Lady May, 25 January 1902.”
Adrian came up and took her arm. ‘Hungry?’ he asked. She shook her head, and he saw that there were tears in her eyes. ‘Damn that old idiot!’ he said. ‘Darling, it’s going to be a quiet winter. What do you bet? We'll be stuck in some bloody desert, eating our heads off with boredom. We're going to be forgotten men, forgotten by Hitler, forgotten by the General Staff, forgotten by —’
‘It’s all right,’ she said.
Mrs. Vyner came up, fastening her shabby fur round her long, thin neck, and the three of them walked back into the rectory garden.
Next day, Ruth and Adrian went back to London. That night they went out with friends and had plenty to drink. Ruth was able to sleep that night. The next evening, their last, they dined quietly in the flat. She had cooked the things he liked best, but neither of them had much appetite. At last they gave up trying. The one clock in the flat went on sucking time, like an endless string of macaroni, into its bright, vacant face. Every clock in London seemed to crash out the quarters outside their drawn curtains. When the telephone rang as they sat over their coffee, Adrian got up to answer itas though he were glad of the interruption. It turned out to be a man who used to be in love with Ruth and who had been out of England for some time. Adrian had always disliked him, but he sounded very cordial now. Afterwards he said, ‘I’m glad Mike has turned up again. I want you to go out with him. That's why I said to him just now, “When I’m gone I'd take it as a personal favour if you’d give Ruth a ring now and then and take her out and give her a good time.”’
‘I don’t want to go out with Mike,’ she said.
‘Please do,’ he said. ‘It will make me feel better to think of you looking pretty, out dancing and enjoying yourself.’
The following morning there was plenty to do— breakfast, a taxi, last-minute things: Meeting at some moment in the bustling, efficient nightmare, Adrian said, ‘I don’t suppose I'll be able to wire you, but I'll give someone a letter to post from the port after we sail,’ and Ruth said, “That will be fine.’ She felt cold and frightened and a little sick, as though this were the morning fixed for a major operation. She wasn’t going to the station, so they said goodbye in the hall, a tiny cupboard built for a man to hang his hat in, for a woman to read a telephone message in — not for heroic partings.
‘Well, take care of yourself,’ Adrian said. ‘Don't forget what we said last night. If the bombings start again, you go down to Cornwall, you go anywhere. Anyway, you get out of here. Promise? Otherwise I won't be able to keep my mind on this wan.
‘I promise,’ Ruth said, smiling. Language was inadequate, after all. One used the same words for a parting which might be for years, which might end in death, as one did for an overnight business trip. She put her arms tightly round him and said, ‘Good-bye, my love.’
‘Darling,’ he said. ‘I can’t begin to tell you —’
‘Don't,’ she said. ‘Don’t.’
The door shut, and presently Ruth heard the taxi driving away. She went back into the living-room, sat down, and looked at the breakfast things. Adrian’s cup was still half full of coffee, a cigarette stubbed out in the wet saucer. The cigarette seemed to have acquired a significance, to be the kind of relic which in another age would have been put carefully away in a little box with the toenail parings of a dead man, the hair clippings of a dead woman.
‘The next two days were bad. Ruth felt that the major operation had come off but that she still had not come round from the anaesthetic. She pottered about the flat, went for a walk, bought some things she wanted, dropped in at a film and a concert. Time now seemed to have receded, to be an enormous empty room which she must furnish, like any other aimless woman, with celluloid shadows of other people’s happiness, with music that worked one up for nothing. An hour or so after Adrian left, she put through a call to Cornwall. ‘Adrian’s gone,’ she said, and across the bad line, across a rival conversation between two men who were trying to arrange a board meeting, she heard her mother-in-law’s calm, tired voice saying, ‘Yes, it’s Wednesday, isn’t it? I knew he was going on Wednesday.’ As she hung up the receiver, she suddenly remembered a French governess out of her childhood who used to rage, weeping with anger, ‘Oh, you British, you British!’ Her friends rang her up with careful, planned kindness. Their stock opening was ‘Has he gone? Oh, you poor darling! But aren’t you terribly relieved it’s over?’ and then they would ask her to a dinner or a theatre. Their manner was caressing but sprightly, as though she were a stretcher case who mustn’t be allowed to know that she was suffering from shock. She slept very badly and had terrible dreams, into which the sea always seemed to come. She went to sleep picturing the blacked-out ship creeping out cautiously into the dark sea. The girl who washed her hair had once told her that her brother had been torpedoed off Norway and that he had been rescued, covered with oil from the explosion. In one of Ruth’s dreams Adrian was struggling in a sea of oil while Mrs. Vyner, watching from her cliff garden, said “Yes, it's Wednesday, isn’t it? I knew he was going to drown on Wednesday.”
On the third day, Ruth woke up feeling different. It was a queer feeling, exhausted but peaceful, as though her temperature had fallen for the first time after days of high fever. The end of something had been reached, the limit of some capacity for suffering. Nothing would be quite as bad again. She thought, ‘After all, there are thousands of women going through what I’m going through and they don’t make a fuss.’ She got up and dressed, with particular care, because she planned to go round to one of the women’s recruiting stations today and find out about a job. It would be important to make a good impression at the first interview. Afterwards she would write a funny letter about it to Adrian, she thought. Although it would probably be months before any mail caught up with him, she would write tonight and tell him not to worry, that she had finished making a fuss and was being sensible, like all the other women in England - like Mrs. Mason, the jolly woman in tweeds singing away at the Te Deum as though there were still something to be thankful about.
She was out all day, and when she put her latchkey in the door she was humming. As she took off her hat, the telephone rang, and she went to it, still humming, and said ‘Hello?’ Adrian’s voice said ‘Darling?’ and her knees went weak. She sat down suddenly, while his voice raced on, sounding excited and a bit blurred, as though he had had two or three drinks. ‘I’m at the station, I'll be right round. Got to the port, but something went wrong. We all waited, then the message came through that it was cancelled. I wasn't allowed to phone you.’
‘Cancelled?’ she said stupidly. ‘You're not going?”
‘Not for another week,’ he said. ‘Maybe ten days. God, what luck. I’m going out to find a taxi. Darling, don’t move until I get there.’
Ruth heard the click as he hung up, and she hung up slowly, too. For a moment she sat quite still. The clock on the table beside her sounded deafening again, beginning to mark off the ten days at the end of which terror was the red light at the end of the tunnel. Then her face became drawn and, putting her hands over it, she burst into tears.