WAR AMONG STRANGERS 17 January 1942
On the day that war broke out between the United States and Japan, Mrs. Bristowe rang up her husband at his Ministry in London. She was at home in Hampshire, and the call took some time to come through. The line was busy, probably with other agitated telephonings, thought Mrs. Bristowe, trying not to pace up and down the room like a caged animal. If only John were here to be soothing and sensible. The night before she had sat by the radio alone, listening to the details of the Japanese attack, taking them in with part of her mind while her thoughts flew in dismay to her two children, Simon and Janet, small and stranded and precious, in California.
Ordinarily the phone was never quiet; now it was mute, its mum blackness suddenly as hostile as an unfriendly face. She began to prowl again, listening abstractedly to Mrs. Prout banging a brush against the staircase banisters out in the hall. Mounted on a terrifying old bicycle, Mrs. Prout sailed up from the village every day to oblige Mrs. Bristowe. With the children not there and John in London all the week, it was easy enough to jog along that way.
The phone rang suddenly, and Mrs. Bristowe’s lunge towards it sent a scatter of books and knitting off the table. As she picked up the receiver, the voice of the Ministry switch- board girl chirped in her ear, and after a pause John’s voice said ‘Hello’.
‘Oh, darling,’ she said, ‘I was afraid you might be at a conference or something.’
‘No, I’m not at a conference. What's the trouble, Barbara?’
Mrs. Bristowe found herself fighting back tears as she said, ‘This awful news!”
‘What? I don’t hear you very well.’
‘I said this awful news,’ Mrs. Bristowe repeated, raising her voice.
“Oh, well, it wasn’t entirely unexpected, was it?”
‘John, I’m so dreadfully worried about the children. I didn’t sleep a wink last night.’
‘I don’t think you need worry,’ he said. ‘I really don’t. From what we know of them, the Maddisons seem thoroughly good, solid people. I’m sure they'll look after the kids all right, whatever happens.’
“But it mayn’t be safe for them to stay with the Maddisons,’ Mrs. Bristowe said. ‘They may evacuate all the children from that area if things look bad. If only there was some way of getting at them!’
‘Well, there isn’t, I’m afraid. We can cable Mrs. Maddison, of course, and ask for news. Cables are going through without much delay,’ he added in his Ministry voice.
Mrs. Bristowe had the peevish sensation that she was listening to a Civil Service pamphlet, one of the bracing kind that was pushed in at the door with the mail and told you to stay put, to keep off the roads during invasion, and to avoid panic and despondency. What she had wanted, ever since that awful moment last evening, was a bosom on which to lean and cry, not a bit of brisk, official buff paper. She said crossly, ‘I suppose Germany’s going to declare war on them next.’
‘It certainly looks like it.’
‘I ought never to have allowed the children to go without Nanny. Never, never! Or I ought to have gone with them myself.’
“Now, darling! You know you didn’t want to leave your job in the W.V.S.”
‘Oh, damn the W.V.S.!’ she cried, and hung up.
A moment later she regretted it, but by then it was impossible to do anything. Another call, to tell John she was sorry, to receive his amused forgiveness, would make her hopelessly late for the canteen.
She ran upstairs to get her hat and was halted in the bed- room, as though by a blow over the heart, by the photograph of the children on her dressing table. It was the latest snapshot, taken by Mrs. Maddison on Simon's birthday and sent over with a long, careful letter describing his presents, the children who had come to tea, what he had said, what Janet had worn. Certainly, Mrs. Maddison did the thing handsomely ~ regular cables, details of gains in height and weight, school reports, copious snapshots. Now that her children weren't here, Mrs. Bristowe seemed to know far more about them than she ever had before.
She sat down, the photograph in her hand, the canteen forgotten. The children looked very fair and English in the clear American sunlight, Simon in his shorts and jersey, Janet in her smock from Liberty’s. The tears came into Mrs. Bristowe’s eyes again, and refused to be pushed back, as she thought of the last time she had seen her children, that dreadful morning at the port from which they had sailed. They had seemed terribly small then as she stood beside them, making inane remarks to their escort, a jolly Girton girl who looked, thank God, as though she would be good at swimming. The time which elapsed before Mrs. Bristowe got the cable saying that they had arrived safely was the worst torture she had ever known. Torture was really a novelty to her, the placidly contented wife of a permanent Civil Servant, but she had made up for all arrears of suffering in a single bound. Was she going to have to go through all that over again? John had seemed maddeningly smug about the Maddisons, but how could you be certain how people were going to behave in an emergency? Letters and photographs didn’t tell you anything, really. No, thought Mrs. Bristowe wretchedly, she had sent her children into a war among strangers. Kind strangers, but strangers all the same.
The striking of a clock reminded Mrs. Bristowe that they would soon be ringing up from the canteen to find out what had happened to her. She ran downstairs and called to Mrs. Prout, ‘Back for tea. If a cable comes over the telephone, take it down carefully.’ Then she sprinted for the bicycle shed.
Next to her at the canteen that morning, scraping carrots and scrubbing potatoes, was a chatty Mrs. Warner, who immediately cried, ‘Oh, my dear, I've thought so much about you! Aren’t you worried sick about your Simon and Janet, right out there in the middle of it all?’ And another helper said, ‘I was only saying to Dick last night, “Thank goodness we didn’t send Brian and Peter over that time.” Somehow, I always felt one ought to keep them here, even when things looked so bad.’ She sounded pleased with herself, as though conscious of having behaved like a Roman matron while Mrs. Bristowe had ratted on the British Empire. The professional cook, who spoke in a refined voice with pinched vowels to show that she was really a lady and no mistake, sighed, ‘Oh, dear, Ay must say Ay see no end to it now, do you? Ay feel that it will be years and years. Ay do really, Mrs. Bristowe.’ When the school children arrived for lunch, it wasn’t much better. All these shaggy heads, these sturdy little bodies tucking into the soup and dumplings, made Mrs. Bristowe feel terrible. Most of the children were evacuees from Portsmouth, but their mothers could get into a train and come up and see them whenever they wanted. There wasn’t an enormous stretch of water, a continent, and a new war between them.
When Mrs. Bristowe got home and wearily opened the front door, the first thing that she heard was a crash of breaking china. For some reason, this sound meerly the culmination of the day, the final touch to the tale of despair. She went along to the kitchen and found Mrs. Prout on hands and knees, sweeping up the fragments of the afternoon tea tray. ‘Really!’ Mrs. Bristowe said, her voice shaking with unaccustomed anger. ‘I must say I do think this is careless! I'll never be able to match it — never. I suppose you don’t realise how impossible it is to get this sort of thing now? Mr. Bristowe has always been particularly fond of that tea service.’ She did not wait to hear anything that Mrs. Prout might have to say but turned and stalked out of the kitchen, back to the quiet, neat sitting room, where there was no longer danger of taking a header over the children’s litter, back to the telephone which wouldn't ring, the radio which would focus her lonely evening to a pinpoint of terror.
After a while she heard Mrs. Prout coming heavily along the passage, bringing a newly assembled tea tray and wheezing with anxiety as she negotiated the doorpost. Mrs. Prout set the tray down beside Mrs. Bristowe and straightened up, sighing and smoothing her apron. She was a stout woman with steel-rimmed glasses set across a small red button of a nose, which peeped out between glossy red knobs of cheeks.
‘I'm ever so sorry about the tea set, Madam,’ she said. ‘I don't know how I could have been so clumsy, I’m sure. It must be because my mind's not on things on account of thinking about Rose.”
‘Rose?’ said Mrs. Bristowe.
‘Our girl, Rose. The one that went for a nurse to Singapore. The news has given me a turn, as you might say. I don’t trust them yellow monkeys, them Japanese. They won't fight clean, I said to Prout.’
‘Look,’ said Mrs. Bristowe. ‘Go and get another cup and sit down and have a cup of tea with me. It'll do us good.’ Mrs. Prout looked startled, and Mrs. Bristowe had to snap at her ‘Oh, go on, do!’ before she creaked reluctantly out of the room. Those who talk of English class distinctions, thought Mrs. Bristowe in some exasperation, ought to get it quite clear who draws the distinctions.
When Mrs. Prout returned with the cup and saucer, she coughed and murmured ‘Excuse me’ and seated herself on the edge of an armchair. Pouring out the tea, Mrs. Bristowe said, ‘I’m sorry I was cross just now. The truth is I'm worried to death about my children, too. It’s horrid feeling that they’re in the war again, and without me this time.’
‘Tchk!’ Mrs. Prout clicked her tongue sympathetically against her fine, porcelain teeth. ‘Well, Prout says it’s no good worrying. We can’t do anything, he says.’
‘So does Mr. Bristowe.’
‘I didn’t feel easy in my mind when Rose went, but she was all set on it. She looked nice in her uniform, I will say. White. Ever such a bother to keep clean, you'd think, but I suppose there’s not many smuts out there.’
“What I hope is that they don’t come in for any air raids,’ Mrs. Bristowe said. ‘Somehow, the thought of air raids there seems worse than air raids here — I don’t know why. Probably because we’re used to them. And Simon would mind. Janet is solid as a rock, but Simon would be frightened.’
‘Ar, poor little dear! Well, our Rose has never been frightened of anything. If she gets hold of any of them Japs, she'll tell them off all right. I can just hear her!’ Mrs. Prout chuckled richly, plastering one knuckly red hand across her mouth.
It began to get dark. They sat on, speaking their thoughts aloud, courteously waiting for each other to finish, returning to their separate thought tracks. A dim comfort had begun to flow from Mrs. Prout to Mrs. Bristowe, the same sort of comfort she remembered in her childhood. Then a thin night-time wail for help had brought an instant, subterranean upheaval from the other bed, the splutter of a match, the apparition of her nurse in a red flannel dressing-gown, with steel-rimmed glasses on a kind, red face like Mrs. Prout’s. Then all of life had been - as one could fool oneself into thinking this moment was — safe firelight, the ticking of a clock telling time that would last forever, the radio not invented, Japan a squiggle on the map, suffering something that happened to grown-ups in books.
Mrs. Prout stirred and sighed. ‘Well, one of these days we'll all have a good laugh thinking of these times. You'll have your little pair back, Mrs. Bristowe, and we'll have our Rose, and Hitler and that nasty snake of an emperor will have the ropes round their necks, as they richly deserve. Until then, as Prout says, there’s nothing to do but get on with it.’ She struggled to her feet. ‘My word, I'll have to do the blackout and pop home, or else Prout will be thinking I’ve met one of them soldiers in a dark lane.”
Presently she put her head round the door. ‘Just off,’ she said. ‘Sure you're all right, Madam?’ she added, to show that the intimacy of the last hour was at an end.
‘Quite all right,’ Mrs. Bristowe said.
Mrs. Prout had not been gone long when the phone rang.
It was John. ‘That you, Barbara? It struck me that I wasn’t as sympathetic as I might have been this morning, darling. Ancaster was in the room and it happened to be — anyway, I’m sorry I was terse.’
‘I'm sorry I hung up on you.’
‘I thought you’d like to know that I’ve sent a long cable to the Maddisons. We ought to hear pretty soon, I should think.’ He gave an awkward cough. ‘Until then, my dear, chin up and keep smiling, won't you?’
Mrs. Bristowe felt that she was being dished out another pamphlet, but she said, ‘I'll try. All we can do is get on with it, I suppose.’
‘Exactly,’ he said in a relieved voice. ‘Just what I said this morning. Well, darling, I'll try to get down midweek if the old boy isn’t tiresome. Ring me if the Maddisons’ answer comes before then, won't you?
When she had hung up the receiver the clock was striking six. She went over to the radio, turned the knob, and sat down with all the other anxious women to knit and listen.