COMBINED OPERATIONS 29 August 1942
Gregory Parsons opened the gate of his Oxfordshire cottage and trod delicately up the path between the clipped lavender hedges. It was a beautiful summer evening and he looked warm and a trifle dusty in his dark town clothes. He had taken off his black Homburg hat as he walked from the station, and carried it in his hand, together with the evening paper anda large government briefcase. At the door he paused, then cautiously lifted the latch and entered his home as though proposing to make off with the silver.
His wife, Laura, wearing a red-and-white striped blouse and dark-blue slacks, came into the dark little flagstoned hall, carrying a bowl of raspberries. ‘You needn't worry,’ she said. ‘They're down at the pub.’
‘Thank God for that!’ said Gregory. He dropped his hat, newspaper, and briefcase in a heap on the floor and took off his coat, making a not very successful shot with it in the direction of a chair. Then he followed her into the kitchen, where she was filling a row of bottling jars with the raspberries.
‘Well?’ he said. ‘How did they take it?’
‘Perfectly all right,’ she said. ‘They didn’t even seem surprised.’ “When are they —”
“The day after tomorrow. Roger says he’s due for a week's leave anyway, and they think they'll go off to Wales and fish. Then they’re going to try and get the Murdochs to lend them their studio for a bit.’
“Trust Roger to try and get something on the cheap. ‘Thursday! My God, I can hardly believe it.’ Gregory stretched out his arms luxuriously, and a look of utter peace came over his nervous, sallow face. ‘I couldn't keep my mind on anything today. There was a conference this afternoon, rather an important one. All through it I kept on thinking, what the hell shall we do if they dig their toes in and say they won’t go?’
“It was easy, really,’ Laura said, snapping rubber rings carefully round the bottles. ‘I broke it to Madeline this morning when at last she condescended to get herself out of bed and come downstairs. She was scratching round here making herself some coffee when I did it. I said, “Oh, Mad, Gregory and I feel like beasts, but we've got to ask you and Roger to turn out. Gregory’s sister Penelope and her children are coming over from Ireland, and they haven't got another place to go except us.”
‘It sounds a bit fishy,’ said Gregory. ‘They know Penelope and I can’t stand the sight of each other. However, I expect you put it over all right. What did she say?”
‘She said, “Of course, my dear, That was in the arrange- ment when we came here. You promised to let us know when anything like that turned up.” All very reasonable, I must say. It made me feel rather dreadful. Then, when Roger got back this evening, she sidetracked him upstairs and told him. I heard their voices for ages when I was picking the raspberries. Then they came down, and Roger said about Wales and the Murdochs’ studio, and they went off to the pub.”
‘Leaving you picking the raspberries, said Gregory bitterly. ‘Of course. If that bitch had ever done a hand's turn around here to help you, things might have been very different.’
‘Oh, I'd really rather do it,’ said Laura. ‘You know the fuss. Besides, they're not going to eat these raspberries, are they?’
‘No, by God, they're not,’ said Gregory cheerfully. ‘Now that they're going —’ He stopped and repeated the words, as though he were rolling them on the tongue like some rare old vintage. ‘Now that they're going, it’s amusing to try and decide what got us down worst. Do you know, with me I think it’s Roger’s habit of handing me the vegetables at meals. Handing them to me as though I were a guest in my own house, mark you.’
‘The way Mad leaves the bathroom!’ said Laura. ‘It certainly will be nice to go in and not find clouds of powder over the glass, everything swimming in water, and the lavatory jammed with face tissues.’
‘It will also be pleasant to turn the radio to the programme we want for a change,’ said Gregory.
He got up and went out into the hall. Picking up his briefcase, he waved it at Laura and said, ‘I've got two bars ‘of chocolate in here that little shop off the Strand had some in today.’
‘Darling, how lovely! We'll eat it when we go to bed.’
‘Soon we'll be able to eat it when and where we like,’ said Gregory. ‘Well, I’m going to change. You know, it’s indescribable how different the house feels when they're out of it.’ Trolling Figaro unmusically but happily, he climbed the rickety stairs to their bedroom. There he got out of his London clothes, letting them lie where they dropped, and put on a loud coloured shirt and a pair of dirty grey flannel trousers. Then he went downstairs and out into the garden, where he fetched a hoe from the lean-to shed and ambled off to the vegetable plot.
Gregory began hoeing the bind-weed among the carrot rows, enjoying the small, muscular effort after the long day of sitting at his desk and in the hot, crowded train. The carrots were looking fine. ‘Next year,’ Roger had said the other day, ‘we must find room for more carrots and cut out the turnips. Neither Mad nor I like turnips.’ Like his damned nerve, thought Gregory, without bitterness. The time for bitter- ness was over and past. This was the weak and delicious period of convalescence, when it was pleasant to lie back and think dreamily how much had been endured. Now that the temperature was down, it was possible for the first time to analyse coolly, and thatin itself was a luxury. Since the Butlers had moved into Willow Cottage, Gregory couldn't remember feeling cool and analytical once. Yet it had seemed such an admirable arrangement at the start. He and Laura had always got on splendidly with Roger and Madeline. They had dined with each other regularly, and Roger and Gregory worked in the same Ministry. Gregory had even felt faintly and agreeably attracted by Madeline, who was blonde and pretty as a bad picture, without the bother of ever having to do anything about it. When the Butlers’ flat was blitzed, there- fore, it seemed a fine idea that they should move out into the country with the Parsons. Gregory couldn't put his finger right on the moment when it had stopped being a fine idea and become hell. Neither could he point triumphantly to any big contributing cause. If anyone had asked him, he would have had to say, ‘Well, it’s partly the way Roger begins every other sentence with “In point of fact”, and Mad talks brightly at breakfast, and Roger is always in the lavatory when I go there, and he gets our bottles of gin mixed, and Mad rings up friends of hers in Cheshire or somewhere and forgets to pay for the calls.’ Half the time it wasn’t even as definite as that. It was a laugh, a way Mad had of sitting, a glance exchanged between her and Roger, which was sufficient to set Gregory’s teeth on edge. Maybe he had exaggerated some of it now and then. For instance, in this mood of splendid, almost lightheaded detachment which had come over him as he hoed the carrot rows, he knew that quite possibly Madeline hadn't eaten his butter ration a few days before. Yet he could remember how, at the time, the pat had definitely looked smaller to him than when he had seen it last, and how he had confided to Laura in bed that night that he was positive that Madeline had helped herself from it for the sandwich she had suddenly felt like making the night before. He had shaken with anger, thinking of his butter disappearing into that wide, peasant mouth, which had once seemed to him aimlessly desirable. Rather idiotic, sordid little emotions they seemed now. He and Laura had never been able to talk freely except in bed. Willow Cottage wasn’t like a large house, where you could get away easily from other people. It was old, too, and sounds bounced through the leaks in its beams and wattle-and-daub walls. As they lay with the covers drawn up to their chins and talked in furious low voices, they could hear the Butlers murmuring away in the next room like furtive doves under their eaves.
Roger and Madeline walked up the path between the lavender to Willow Cottage. They were arm in arm and feeling very affectionate and happy, for they had been celebrating down at the Bull. Suddenly it had seemed an occasion for celebration, and they had stayed on and on in the stuffy little bar, with its darts board and picture of Queen Victoria as a girl. ‘In point of fact,’ Roger had said as he brought over their third pint, ‘poor Laura’s nothing but an Andromeda of the sink, with no Perseus in sight. A certain amount of household toil is inevitable in these days, but is it necessary to make quite such a tiresomely conspicuous sacrifice of oneself?’ They had decided that it wasn’t and that Thursday would be a merciful deliverance all round. When they went into the cottage the first thing they saw was Gregory’s hat, newspaper, and coat lying on the floor. Roger nodded at them. “Typical Gregory,’ he said in a low voice. ‘Just as we were saying. Charming when you don’t have to live with it, no doubt.’ He picked up the hat and put it carefully on the table just as Laura came out of the kitchen and said, “There you are, you two.’
“Yes, here we are,’ said Madeline. She and Roger exchanged a slight smile. Sitting at Queen Victoria’s feet, they had found out that Laura’s habit of stating the obvious was one of the things that made them both want to scream.
Supper was an amiable meal, at which the approaching departure was mentioned lightly by both couples. Roger said that being in London again would have its advantages. ‘In point of fact, the train journey is a bit of a sweat,’ he said, getting up and handing Gregory the dish of peas. “Thanks, Roger,’ said Gregory mildly, helping himself. After supper they went into the living-room, and Roger fiddled with the radio until he found a programme of swing. Ordinarily Gregory detested swing music, but tonight he wagged his foot and hummed.
‘I suppose you'll want old Carter and his taxi to take your stuff to the station on Thursday,’ he said.
“I suppose so,’ said Roger.
Gregory hummed some more. He and Laura went to bed early. They sat up in bed, reading and eating the two bars of chocolate with private, deliberate greed. They could hear the Butlers in the next room, talking in low voices, Roger cleaning his teeth and gargling, and the scratchy sound of Madeline brushing out her thick, fair hair.
Any one of these noises would have been calculated, twenty-four hours before, to make Gregory irritable, but now he listened dreamily. It was nice to think of Madeline brushing her light hair in the candlelight. The silly creature had nearly set the thatch on fire one night a few weeks back, but he thought of that incident only momentarily. He was thinking of her sunburnt arms raised as she brushed, pulling taut the lines of that really delectable bosom. ‘I hope it will come off all right Thursday,’ he said.
“It will come off all right,’ said Laura comfortably. ‘Don’t you worry.’ She shut up her book and snuggled down beside him.
Gregory blew out the candle and lay down, too. He felt very happy. Already he could look ahead with anticipation to the time when he would again feel that particular need which the Butlers had always filled so satisfyingly, when he would pick up the telephone and say ‘Roger? Look, what are you and Mad doing tonight?’