THE HUNGER OF MISS BURTON 16th January 1943
Ever since food began to getva bit tight, Miss Burton had carried a wolf around with her under the neat waistband of her tweed skirt. Sometimes she felt that it wasn’t one wolf only. It was a whole wolf pack cutting up in the vacuum at the back of her grey herringbone. Before the war, she couldn't remember thinking much about food, but now she thought about it constantly. She thought of thick steaks sitting on beds of fried onions, of cakes topped with a Mont Blanc of whipped cream, of black cherry jam on hot, flaky croissants. Now and then she even dreamed about them, as in the old days she used to dream about love. No more erotic visions of unknown or (even more embarrassing) known males flitted disturbingly through Miss Burton’s slumbers. Instead, they were punctuated with good blowouts of dream food which never had any taste, which melted tantalisingly into the slow return of the chilly room and the school bell clamorously ringing.
Miss Burton's wolves were at their worst in the middle of the morning, just before break. Then they leaped about play- fully, producing awkward rumbling noises which must, she often felt, be audible to Mr. Duval, romping through ‘falloir’ with the Second Form next door. Sometimes she glanced sharply at the boys, expecting to catch them grinning. But they were too preoccupied with their own hunger, poor little devils, counting the moments until their eleven o'clock glass of milk and a biscuit. The staff let up also for cups of tea in the staff room — old Blenkinsop, little bald Kendall, Duval with his stiffleg. All the young masters had gone by now; there was no one to flirt with, even if one felt inclined. Miss Burton seldom felt inclined any longer. Probably food was at the back of that, too; sex impulses don’t flourish on a meagre diet. Her one glorious flutter, the affair with Emil that walking summer holiday in the Black Forest, had been done on rich, stupefying food — garlic sausage, pig’s knuckle and buttery cabbage, enormous draughts of beer. Emil was dead now, his country was at war with hers, that innocent Germany had vanished like a dream into the forest. Lately she hadn't even bothered to have the grey in her hair touched up toa dark, unreal-looking auburn.
When she went along to the staff room one Saturday morning towards the end of the autumn term, she found Kendall and the others already there, standing warming their hands round their cups of tea as though they were holding small individual braziers. They were being economical on the central heating this year, and in the staff-room grate smouldered a few dejected logs to which Mrs. Baker, the headmaster’s wife, always referred as ‘a jolly wood fire’. When. Miss Burton came in, Kendall was puffing at it unhopefully with the bellows, and Margaret Pierce, the music mistress, was saying, ‘I’m famished as well as frozen. Breakfast this morning was really too ludicrous — some of the mothers are going to start complaining before you can say knife.’ Miss Burton poured herself a cup of tea and gulped the hot liquid gratefully, feeling it cut the classroom chill in her insides. ‘It’s something about this wartime food,’ she said. ‘I eat and eat bread, but I get up feeling that I haven't had anything.’ ‘Well, thank God I haven’t got much more of it,’ said Margaret. She was leaving at the end of the term to marry a Canadian soldier named Jay Sturges, whom she had met at a local dance. Miss Burton stared at her, standing warming her long, slender legs in front of Mrs. Baker’s jolly wood fire, and snapped, ‘If I were ten years younger, my child, you wouldn't catch me stopping here one moment longer than was necessary, either.” Margaret just yawned and nodded unbelievingly, hitching her skirt a little higher at the back so that Kendall had a good view of the silk stockings Jay had given her. ‘How long till lunch, oh Lord, how long?’ she sighed as Miss Burton picked up her books and went out.
When the morning eventually ended and the lunch for which Margaret had prayed arrived, it turned out to be of the variety which looks ample but soon subsides, leaving a vacuum. Miss Burton, who presided over one of the tables, wondered how many more ways Miss Ruddock, the hard- pressed cook, would think up of disguising vegetables as something else. And pulse! Really, with the amount of pulse that was stuffed into the boys, the poor little wretches’ insides must be blown out with enough wind to start an Atlantic gale. It was a temptation to give herself a slightly larger helping of the hot treacle roly-poly — after all, the boys had mothers who sent them things, potted meat and jam; Morley, the urchin on her right, had had a cake as big as his head this week — but she was scrupulously fair down to the last crumb.
As she began to eat, careful not to bolt the delicious sweet stuff for which she was pining, she remembered thankfully that it was Saturday and her turn to be off duty. Usually she went into the town with Margaret Pierce or Miss Ruddock, and they shopped and went to a film. It wasn’t particularly exciting, but there was a bogus Elizabethan café in the High Street where they served hot chocolate and really nice homemade scones. Miss Burton enjoyed sitting in a corner under the orange-shaded wrought-iron candelabra, glancing through an old Tatler and feeling the warmth of the shopping women at the tables all round her, with their flushed, homely faces and their baskets full of food. It was something, at any rate, to get away from St. Ermin’s for an hour or two.
But Margaret, buttonholed as they were all pouring out of the dining-room, shook her head.
‘Sorry, Burty,’ she said, ‘I can’t manage a flick today. I've got a date.’
‘I suppose it’s Jay,’ said Miss Burton.
‘We're going to a dance at the Red Lion this evening. See you on the bus, though.”
As they trundled towards the market town later that afternoon, separated by countrywomen with bundles and soldiers with rifles and packs, Miss Burton glanced at Margaret across the bus and reflected grudgingly that she was looking nice. She was wearing her good blue coat, and the scarf twisted round her red hair brought out the colour of her eyes. Although she wasn’t a type which would have appealed to Emil - Emil had liked women to be cosily built — most men would think her attractive. It was obvious that some man, Jay Sturges or another, would want to take her away from pounding out Czerny’s Piano Exercises with stupid kids who hadn't a spark of music in their souls. As always on the days when she was meeting Jay, she had a bright, happy expression of anticipation, different from the fretful look she wore all week at St. Ermin’s. Miss Burton had a sudden horrid pang of envy, an empty, dropping sensation worse than anything experienced in those moments when her wolves were clamouring.
“Well, have a good time,’ she said when the bus rattled into the market place and they all got out.
‘Be good!’ Margaret called gaily, and hurried off through the crowd.
More leisurely, Miss Burton progressed up the packed High Street, with stops at some of the shop windows, in which she saw herself reflected, portrait of a gentlewoman in grey herringbone with a party of wolves under the third button. As she suspected, lunch had subsided and she was ravening again, but there was a little time to be filled in before she could decently make tracks for Ye Olde Tudor Café. She entered a sweetshop and bought her week’s ration of chocolate. At least, it was better now that it was rationed. You could be sure of getting it, and not have some hateful, pert girl snap, ‘Any children? We keep it for the children now,’ with her hand resting beside the pile of little twopenny bars and her impudent, mocking eyes searching Miss Burton’s face as though expecting to see marriage lines there in electric lights. Coming out, she was halted by the sight of a mound of freshly boiled lobsters in the fishmonger’s. One holiday before the war, the parents of one of the boys, wealthy people named Douglas, had asked her out to lunch in London, and they had had lobster salad at Scott’s — an ambrosial lobster with thick mayonnaise, followed by raspberries and cream, coffee, and a Cointreau that sent Miss Burton walking on air out into Piccadilly, telling Mr. Douglas that his son was the sort of boy who every once ina while made the teaching profession seem worth while. He had been charming, she remembered. Well, she had still taken trouble over how she looked in those days, before she became merely a disembodied stomach with a menagerie prowling about in it. Now, nothing seemed important any more compared with the small, private sensuality of eating.
The memory had made her mouth water, and she crossed the road quickly to the orange-shaded warmth of Ye Olde Tudor Café. She sat there for an hour or more, spinning out her order of hot chocolate and scones, glancing ironically at the pictures of well-fed people in the Tatler. ‘The Lady Marigold Taggart-Bly leads an austere life at her cottage in the country.’ A week at St. Ermin’s, my girl, and you’d know all about austerity. Soldiers and their girls came in, the men clumping a bit self-consciously, the girls with rosy, shining faces under their pert hats. Miss Burton wondered suddenly what Margaret and Jay were doing. She asked for a second order of scones, and ate them to the last crumb with deliberate, enjoyable greed.
At the cinema, she saw the feature picture through and then sat on for a bit of the beginning again. It was comfortably warm in there, and the star was a big, fair fellow who reminded her of Emil. If he were alive now, he would be forty-eight and her enemy, but she saw him always as a young man of twenty-seven, wearing a comic green hat and leather pants and looking as beautiful as a god. All round her, couples were nuzzling and making unabashed love as they watched the picture. Maybe Margaret was there, sitting happily in the darkness, feeling a man’s cheek against her hair as she pretended to watch that nonsense on the screen. Miss Burton felt tired and depressed all at once, and suspected that she had a headache coming.
She was early for the bus, after all. She sat in the little shelter, squeezed up on a bench next to a stout woman and her tired, wailing children. The winter evening was still and beautiful, and there was a wonderful full moon. Miss Burton was wondering what there would be for supper — on Saturday evenings Miss Ruddock sometimes spread herself a little — and debating whether she should open her packet of chocolate or not, when she saw Margaret and Jay on the opposite side of the market place. She was surprised, for Margaret had said that she was coming home on the last bus, and she watched them curiously as they walked up and down in the moonlight. Jay was very tall; she would have known him anywhere by his height. He and Margaret stopped, still talking. Then they went on again, but a few yards further on they stopped for the second time, and suddenly Jay turned on his heel and walked off, and Margaret came hurrying over to the shelter.
‘Halloa!’ said Miss Burton. ‘I thought you and Jay were going to make a night of it.’
“We changed our minds,’ said Margaret shortly.
Before Miss Burton could say any more, the bus came in and they had to scramble for seats. It was dark inside the bus, the lights were partly blacked over, and everyone's face looked greenish and ghostly. Miss Burton decided against opening the chocolate now, for it would be difficult to avoid offering Margaret a piece.
‘Did you go to the cinema?’ she asked.
Margaret didn’t answer, and Miss Burton, with a little shock, realised that she was crying. She was sitting, swaying with the movement of the bus, and the tears were running down her face and dropping on the blue coat. Miss Burton thought, “They've quarrelled, he’s let her down,’ and through her mind flashed the idea that they might have broken the engagement. The chocolate slid off her lap, and she bent mechanically to pick it up. She didn’t feel like opening it, now. The Olde Tudor tea must have been more filling than she realised, for she felt a sense of utter, wonderful repletion, as though she had just had a satisfying meal that would last along time.
“Two to the St. Ermin’s gates,’ she said to the bus conductress, in such a strong, buoyant tone that the other people turned their greenish faces towards her in dim astonishment.