IT’S THE REACTION 24 July 1943
Miss Catherine Birch trotted through the lobby of the ministry where she was employed, automatically waved her pass at the doorman, and joined the hurrying throng of men and women pouring down the London street towards the bus stops and tube stations. Their haste was contagious. She began to scurry along as though a vitally important evening lay before her. Most of the other female employees of the ministry were girls with hatless manes of long, glossy hair hanging round their shoulders or setted up in red or blue snoods. The evening was warm, and they raced along bare-legged in their flimsy sandals, their bright, cheap coats hanging open. In contrast, Miss Birch seemed to be wearing a great many clothes. Her tailored suit, felt hat, Liberty-silk scarf, stockings, gloves, chubby, rolled umbrella, briefcase, and sensible morocco-grained leather bag gave her something of the appearance of a schoolmistress bringing up the rear of a double column of dryads.
In the tube, the ministry faces thinned out and merged with greater London. Miss Birch stood in the packed train r-morocco purse pressed against the bosom of a stout matron in slacks, while her hatbrim brushed the cheek of a young American soldier who was despairingly studying the map of stations over their heads. Her mind went on fretting over that morning’s row in the department. She didn’t really know how it had happened. She had felt tired and out of sorts, someone’s stupid inaccuracy had inflamed her, and the next thing she knew, she was having it out with Mr. Danvers. After the row was over, her hands shook and her voice was weak and quavery. She went to the women’s washroom before lunch, wishing that she could lock herself in and have a good howl. Nan Cruddock, from the department, was there, powdering her nose and drawing a modish square mouth over the Victorian bow with which nature had afflicted her. ‘Know what I think, Birch?’ Nan had said kindly as she leaned towards the mirror, while alongside her Miss Birch dabbed her cheeks with a leaf torn from a little book of papier poudre. ‘Know what? It’s about time you had some leave. Ask Danvers for some, go off down to the country and find a cow to look at, and for God’s sake relax. If you don’t, you’re for the ministry heebie-jeebies — in plain English, darling, a breakdown. Heavens, I must fly!’ And she had rushed off to lunch with the usual mob of people. She was a good-hearted creature, though, in spite of her flightiness, and there might even be some common sense in what she said, Miss Birch had reflected later over her solitary sandwich in the canteen. Maybe things had been working up to the morning’s flare-up for quite a while.
The train filled and emptied, the American boy got out, and Miss Birch leaned against other bosoms before she got to her own station. It was ten minutes’ walk from there to Richelieu House, the block of flats where she lived. Three or four of the neighbourhood shops were still open; this district resembled a village, flowing on in its muddled eighteenth- century way round the twentieth-century blocks of steel and concrete which had grown up in it. Miss Birch called in at the little tobacconist-newsagent on the corner by the public house and bought some cigarettes. The woman behind the counter said, ‘I’ve got your Player’s this evening, but only loose — no packets. Will that do?”
Miss Birch said that it would. Tucking the chubby umbrella under one arm and digging down for change, she had a sudden sociable impulse to start up a little conversation, to say something which would keep her standing there in the shop, sniffing the smell of frying that was coming out of the back room. She said in a friendly voice, ‘My goodness, how your plant has grown! It’s really a beauty now,’ nodding towards a potted cactus which stood on a table next to a sleeping ginger cat. The woman glanced at it and said, ‘Yes, it’s doing well, isn’t it?’ Miss Birch picked up her handful of cigarettes and went out. The impulse hadn’t come to any- thing after all. If it had been Nan Cruddock, now, she knew perfectly well that with half a dozen words Nan would have leaned over the counter and dragged that woman into her life. With a roll of those round blue eyes, she would have built up something warm and friendly in no time. It was years now that Miss Birch had been calling in for her cigarettes and never getting much beyond a ‘good evening’. Never, that is, except when the blitz was on and everything was different.
Miss Birch went on thinking about the blitz as she walked to her own block and went up in the lift with a Mr. Masters, who lived on the same floor.
‘Evening,’ he said pleasantly. ‘Having a lovely bit of weather, aren't we?’
‘Lovely,’ said Miss Birch.
Mr. Masters let himself into his flat which was close to the lift, and Miss Birch walked on down the passage, fumbling for her key. Behind the little black doors she could hear people talking on the telephone, playing their radios, running their bath water. No doubt all the other tenants on Floor K could hear, if they chose to listen, her footsteps ringing out now down the passageway. When she left, early in the morning, milk bottles stood outside the doors with newspapers folded on top of them. The neat, sealed bottles were like footprints discovered on the floor of an ancient cliff city, a sign that life existed somewhere in this echoing honeycomb. Except for the laughter behind the black doors and the occasional chance encounters in the lift, Miss Birch might have fancied herself alone in Richelieu House.
She opened her door, and, crossing to the window, jerked up the blind which she had prudently lowered before leaving so that the afternoon sun would not take the colour out of the blue divan cover and matching armchair. With all those pretty Chinese cushions, a guest would never have suspected that the divan was Miss Birch’s bed until, seating himself, his knees flew up and hit him on the chin. There was a small gateleg table at which she had her meals, sitting upright on a blue chair. Black-framed Medici prints, reproductions of old Italian masters, hung in an even row on the distempered cream wall above the bookcase. In the opposite wall were doors leading to a box of a bathroom and a cupboard of a kitchenette.
Miss Birch remained for a few minutes at the window, still grasping umbrella and briefcase, absently watching the barrage balloons lolling over London. They fitted in with her train of thought. She could remember when they didn’t look like absurd silver Jumbos browsing in space but when she had thought of them as guardians and felt consoled because they were there. By leaning to the right and twitching the net curtain aside, she could see down into the street where, five minutes or so earlier, she had been buying her cigarettes. Seen from above, the jagged space where a bomb had fallen just behind the public house was more noticeable than it was from the road, now that they had cleared the debris away. A land mine had come down, too, not far away. After that awful night, the woman at the tobacconist’s had taken Miss Birch into the back parlour to show her the broken windows and the rubble dust lying thick over everything. ‘It’s a wonder the whole place didn’t come down, and that’s a fact,’ she had said, fetching a packet of cigarettes up from under the counter and shoving them over to Miss Birch.
‘Here you are, dear. Pop ’em in your bag. They're short, but if we don’t get our smokes to quiet our nerves we'll all go balmy, more than likely.’
Miss Birch left the window and began taking off her out- door things, noting that the evening looked settled enough to warrant leaving the chubby umbrella at home tomorrow. She hung her suit carefully on a hanger and changed into an old print summer dress which she kept for wearing at home. After that she usually laid the table for supper. When it was over, she would wash up, perhaps glance over the report she had brought home with her, mend a pair of stockings, and go to bed early with a book. It was her usual way of spending a nice quiet evening, but this evening, for some reason, she didn’t feel like setting it in motion right away. Her head ached badly, probably the result of this morning’s row. She went into the bathroom and took a couple of aspirins. Then she came back and sat down in the armchair by the window.
The details of the office upset flitted through her mind again, but only for a moment. Footsteps sounded outside in the corridor, a door banged, and several people seemed to be laughing and talking together. Miss Birch heard a woman's voice saying emphatically, ‘But if we didn’t phone we'll never get a table.’ The pint milk bottle at Flat 6, just across the passage, must have had a party, which was now proceeding out en masse to find some dinner. At one time the occupants of Flat 6 had meant rather more than a milk bottle in Miss Birch’s life. They were a Mr. and Mrs. Chalmers, and night after night in the blitz they had unrolled their mattresses alongside Miss Birch’s mattress in the corridor on Floor B. Miss Birch, over a shared thermos of tea, had learned that Mrs. Chalmers had married when she was eighteen and that Mr. Chalmers was allergic to cats. She came to know by heart such small, intimate details as the colour of their pyjamas, the smell of Mrs. Chalmers’ face cream. And early in the morning, just before the all-clear sounded jubilantly over battered London, Mr. Chalmers would begin to snore.
Those nights, terrible as they had been, certainly had had their compensations. It seemed to Miss Birch, looking back, that the inhabitants of Floor K had been one jolly family, recognising each other with especial friendliness among all the other prone tenants of Richelieu House. There had been little Mary Rycroft from Flat 2, a pretty child who looked as though she oughtn’t to be out alone in a rainstorm, let alone a blitz. There had been Mr. Masters, strolling down the row of mattresses to ask Miss Birch’s help with a tough word in The Times crossword puzzle or to have a little chat about books. One evening he had noticed that she was reading Nicholas Nickleby, and the next evening he had ambled along to say that he had taken her advice and was starting on his tenth reading of Pickwick Papers that very night. ‘You're right, Miss Birch;) he had said, ‘There's nothing like the old fellows for keeping one’s mind off the fellows up there,’ and he had nodded towards the racket overhead. ‘Pickwick seems to make *em unimportant, somehow.’ They had got really close, like old friends in those talks in the stuffy corridor, listening subconsciously for the warning scream, the sudden hole in the air, the slow glacier of bricks and mortar slipping into the street below. Now he was only a man who took off his hat politely in the lift and said ‘Evening’ before fumbling for his key, going in, and shutting his front door.
Little by little, as normality came back and the passages of Richelieu House were no longer filled with flitting figures carrying torches and pillows, the sense of being neighbours had worn off. Mrs. Chalmers, if she and Miss Birch met in the lift, said, ‘Do you know, I’ve been meaning and meaning to ring you,’ and at the back of her worried baby eyes and plucked eyebrows, Miss Birch could see the thought forming that one of these days they must really ask the old girl over, fill her up with gin, do something about it. After a while, even that thought disappeared. Mrs. Chalmers simply said ‘Hello’ and smiled vaguely, as though Miss Birch were someone she had once met at a party.
Sitting in the blue armchair, the headache nagging at her, Miss Birch wondered if it wasn’t partly her own fault. Maybe there was something she could have said or done, some magic password which would have kept that wonderful new friendliness going. If she hadn't frightened them off, Mary Rycroft or Mr. Masters might have been dropping in for a chat this evening. She pictured Mr. Masters saying in his breezy way ‘This is something like!’ as she brought out the beer that she would make a point of keeping in the refrigerator for him. While he drank it, leaning back against the Chinese cushions and flicking his cigarette ash, manlike, over her blue rug, she would tell him about this morning’s dust-up with Danvers. Telling it to him, getting his calm, man’s point of view, would be a relief far greater than the good howl she had promised herself all day. He would say, ‘Don’t worry, my dear girl, it’s nothing,’ and sure enough it would be nothing. Then he would get up, glass in hand, and wander over to the bookcase. ‘I might have known that you’d be the woman to read William Blake,’ he would say cosily.
With sudden determination, Miss Birch stood up. She peeped in the mirror, patted a few stray wisps of hair into place, and gave a nervous twitch to the neck of her dress. Then, looking in her bag to make sure that her key was there, she opened the door of her apartment, closed it behind her, and began walking rapidly down the passage towards the lift.
Mr. Masters’ electric bell had a different note from hers, she noticed. It sounded loud and startled, and Mr. Masters also looked startled when he answered it. ‘Why — come in!’ he said after the faintest possible pause. Her picture of him had been correct, insofar as he was holding a bottle of beer and an opener in his free hand. He was in his shirtsleeves, and when she walked past him into a frowsier version of her own room, she noticed that his tie was lying on the table with the evening paper, some gramophone records, and a bowl of ice cubes. He made a lunge towards it, and she said, ‘Oh, please don’t bother to get smartened up for me! It’s quite warm this evening, isn’t it?”
‘Feels to me as though we're going to get a bit of thunder,’ he said. ‘Sit down, won't you? I was just . . .’ and he made an embarrassed gesture with the beer bottle and the opener.
‘Do go on,’ said Miss Birch. ‘I do hope you don’t mind my dropping in informally like this. As a matter of fact, I haven't a thing to read, and I wondered if you'd very kindly lend me a book.”
It sounded prim to her own ears, like something she might have written on a memo form in the office. Mr. Masters stopped looking nonplussed and, setting down the beer, gestured to the row of untidy bookshelves against the wall corresponding to the one where Miss Birch’s Medici prints hung. ‘Help yourself,’ he said. ‘I don’t know that you'll find anything much there, but you're welcome.”
She came forward and made a pretence of looking at the titles. Smiling up at him, she said, ‘You know, I always think of you as a bookish sort of person, Remember our talks about Dickens and Thackeray and Trollope in the old blitz days.’
The information that she had thought about him at all brought Mr. Masters’ surprised expression back again. ‘Oh, those,’ he said uneasily. ‘Well, thank God that time’s a long way back now. Seems like a nightmare, doesn’t it? I don’t believe we'll ever get em coming over like that again, either.’
‘Oh, I hope not,’ said Miss Birch.
With lightning, cruel clarity she knew that the visit wasn’t going to come off. Nan would have been sitting down within two minutes in the one armchair in the place, crossing her legs above the knee, sharing Mr. Masters’ beer, smoking his cigarettes, roaring with laughter at jokes that wouldn't be bookish quips about Trollope and Thackeray. Miss Birch, peering blindly along the shelves, was tongue-tied. She pulled out a volume without even bothering to look at its title and straightened up. ‘Might I borrow this?’ she asked. There didn’t seem to be much more to say. Mr. Masters became heartier and obviously a good deal relieved as he accompanied her to the door. ‘Any time you want to borrow another, just pop along,’ he said.
Miss Birch’s room seemed very still in the evening sunlight as she let herself in. She walked over to the window and stood looking out again at the silver blimps floating aimlessly against the sky. London looked beautiful in this clear light, calm and radiant, as though its sirens would never sound again this side of the grave. Listening to that implacable silence, Miss Birch felt the delayed tears stinging at the back of her throat and nose. ‘It’s the reaction,’ she said aloud, as though she were defending herself to someone. ‘You can’t go through month after month of that and not get a reaction sometime.’ She dropped Mr. Masters’ book into the chair and became suddenly busy, laying the checked cloth on the gateleg table and putting the milk for her cup of Ovaltine on to boil. It was going to be another nice quiet evening after all, she thought hopelessly.