CUT DOWN THE TREES 4 September 1943
The old lady, Mrs. Walsingham, lived alone in the big house by the river with her maid, old Dossie. Alone, that is to say, except for forty Canadian soldiers who had taken over most of the house, parked their trucks in the lime avenue, and built their huts on the damp English meadows sloping down to the slow, heron-haunted English stream. Mrs. Walsingham had kept for her own use her room and Dossie’s, an extra one for guests, the dining-room, and the library. The drawing- room was under Holland covers, because Dossie and Mrs. Bunt, who came up from the lodge occasionally to lend a hand, could not be expected to keep it dusted and polished too. Dossie had mourned as they packed away the crystal chandeliers and hung dust sheets over the Gainsborough and the Zoffany conversation pieces, but Mrs. Walsingham had been firm.
“There’s already more than you and I can do here,’ she said, ‘and the days of sitting in drawing-rooms are over, for the moment, anyway. We're all too busy.”
‘If we could get a couple of housemaids from the village, that would be something,’ said Dossie sourly. ‘But there are no girls left. They're all in the Waafs or something like that, larking about, getting into mischief with their bobbed heads and their lipstick and all. They'll want sobering down before anyone will take them into good private service after the war, Madam, and no mistake.”
Mrs. Walsingham laughed and limped over to close an emptied Queen Anne cabinet, her stick tapping with a hollow sound on the bare, polished floor. ‘Maybe they won’t want to be taken,’ she said. ‘Until they do, you and I will have to crawl round as best we can, Dossie. That’s the last packing case. Boxall can come in and take it down to the cellars.’
Dossie, still unconvinced, said, ‘Yes, Madam. But if we did get a couple of girls— young ones who wouldn't be called up yet — if we did, it wouldn't be a bit of good with all those soldiers about. You know what happened to Mavis.
‘Well,’ said Mrs. Walsingham briskly, ‘it’s nota bad thing, with the birth rate the way itis. They’re fine young men, the Canadians. You don't want England populated with nothing but old crocks like you and me, do you?'
Dossie sniffed but did not answer. Mrs. Walsingham had behaved with regrettable airiness over the affair of Mavis, the last kitchen maid who had flitted through the big house in the days when the kitchen still had a cook in it. For Mavis, unrepentant and blooming after fatal evening strolls along the river with a corporal from Vancouver, Mrs. Walsingham had managed to find one of those layettes from America with two of everything, one pink, one blue. She had also provided a pram and sent the girl grapes from the hothouses. Not that it was entirely Mavis’s fault, Dossie thought, though it was true that Mavis had gone on her unfortunate expeditions under the willows not with the air of a lamb being led to the slaughter but rather with the spryness of a young pussycat slipping off down the garden. No, it was those men, those soldiers who were to blame for everything.
Dossie had never had any use for the Canadians from the day they came. Of course, it wasn’t precisely their fault that they were there, but it made her sick to hear their big boots clattering up and down the stairs and to see their trucks standing in line along the lime avenue. When she came across a bunch of them messing about, their heads deep in the bonnets of their trucks, she would either hurry past with averted eyes or say primly, ‘Good afternoon,’ and jerk her head in a brief grudging salutation. Sloppy, she would say to herself as she went by, sloppy young chaps in those nasty khaki romper affairs, no spit and polish, nothing smart and military about them at all. They would watch her walking towards them and their heads would slowly swivel to watch her out of sight, with the marooned male’s desperate interest in a skirt, even though the neat navy-blue article in question covered the limbs of Miss Dossie, the old girl at the big house. The more audacious would whistle and shout ‘Hiya, Miss Dossie!’ or even ‘Hiya, sweetheart!’, grinning and wiping the engine oil off their hands along the seat of their pants. Friendly as puppies, they seemed to interpret Dossie’s out- raged glare as that fine old British reserve that you read about in books. Now and then she attempted to put one right. One day a sunburnt blond youngster, coming round to the kitchen on some errand, said cheerfully, ‘Say, your Mrs. Walsingham is certainly a grand old guy. We think she’s swell, the way she stumps around and runs this big old place without any help. Reminds me a lot of my Aunt Katie on the ranch at home.’
Dossie had drawn a deep breath and given him a terse picture of the house as it used to be — shooting parties in the autumn, Mrs. Walsingham in her diamonds at big dinners, and Queen Mary driving over to see the celebrated herbaceous borders when she was staying in the neighbour- hood. Interested but un-cowed, the young soldier stood listening. ‘Yeah,’ he said, ‘yeah, Queen Mary. She’s another grand old guy.’
If they had called Mrs. Walsingham a grand old guy to her face, Dossie well and disapprovingly knew, her mistress would not have objected. She seemed to like them. Peeping from the house, Dossie would see her limping down towards the home farm with two or three of them in attendance on her, a large imperious old woman in her careless black with a shocking old hat skewer anyhow on her grey hair. Now and then she would pause, with her clothes whipping in the wind, and raise her stick to point out a crop or a prize Guernsey to the young men, who seemed noisily appreciative and not respectfully silent in the uncommunicative island way which Dossie could have understood.
Once a week, their officers, who were billeted elsewhere, came to dine with Mrs. Walsingham. On those evenings, more laughter floated out to Dossie, creaking along the passage with the cheese soufflé and the hot plates trundling on a dinner wagon before her. The dinner wagon was another of Mrs. Walsingham’s ideas. ‘I can’t carry a tray, with my stick, and you'll fall flat on your face if you try,’ she had said, ‘but we can both push things,’ so Dossie thereafter made her entrances in the dining-room as though she were propelling a pram. She had to admit grudgingly, that it was nice to see glass reflected in polished mahogany again, the candles lit, and Mrs. Walsingham leaning back and laughing as serenely as though Jenner and the footman were behind her chair, seeing to dinner, instead of only old Dossie wheezing into the room with her dinner wagon. Yes it was nice, although the Canadian gentlemen couldn't be relied upon not to cry in horribly ringing tones across the table, ‘Dossie, you’re a pearl among women! This soufflé is even better than the one last week. It’s great, isn’t it, Mrs. Walsingham?’ Bridling with resentment, Dossie would murmur, ‘Thank you, sir,’ in a voice intended, though failing, to quell some amiable young bear of a major who would be more than likely to bestow on her a cordial hug, its cordiality somewhat heightened by Mrs. Walsingham’s Lafitte’24, when she handed him his hat and coat at the end of the evening.
Except for these small hospitable occasions, Mrs. Walsingham had her meals in the kitchen. Observing Dossie’s horror the first time she had appeared in the kitchen for a meal, she had said tersely, “Less way to carry the food. Warmer, too, in the winter. At my age, I'd rather be warm in here than grand in there with a rug over my knees.’ So she ate cosily and pleasantly, the heat of the kitchen fire toasting her old back, while Dossie withdrew and chewed morosely in the pantry. She disliked ing all invitations to join her, the innovation intensely. It was all part and parcel of the unwarranted bad joke, the conspiracy against Dossie’s way of life, which they called a war and which had taken first the menservants and then the girls one by one, which had stopped the central heating, made a jungle of the borders and a pasture of the lawns, marooned the two old women in a gradually decaying house with forty Canadians, and made ‘Mrs. Walsingham stop dressing for dinner.
‘It’s out of place now,’ she had said one day when she came upon Dossie carefully rolling her evening stockings to put out on the bed as usual. ‘It’s ridiculous for an old woman to dress herself up every night when thousands of young men are being bombed and killed and when thousands more ‘people are starving all over Europe.’
‘I'm sure I don’t know why a lady shouldn't look nice even if they are,’ snapped Dossie.
“Well, ifyou can’t understand that,’ said Mrs. Walsingham, ‘perhaps you can understand that it’s chilly in the evenings without the central heating. I don’t want to take things off, my good woman, I want to put them on. If you must put out something, put out my tweed shooting cape.’
Dossie was shocked to the marrow of her being, but there was nothing to be done about it. When peace came) sane existence would be immediately resumed. Dossie sincerely believed that the big house, quietly chipping and mouldering above its meadows, would be instantly repopulated, as though by a genie’s wand, with faceless figures in housemaid’s print dresses, in dark-blue livery and gardener’s baize aprons. She believed that the lawns would be velvet again, that visiting royalty would once more point a gracious umbrella towards Mrs. Walsingham’s Himalayan poppies, that the gentry would know their places and sit over their claret in the dining-room, where they belonged. Dossie had a full and ungrudging faith in the resiliency of the British upper class. Until that day came, she would look after things as much as possible and wait.
Dossie rebelled a little when Colonel Walsingham, Mrs. Walsingham’s son, came home from the Middle East on special leave.
“You'll be using the dining-room while the Colonel is with us, I take it, Madam,’ she said after he had telephoned that he was in London and would be home in time for dinner.
‘Why?’ said Mrs. Walsingham wickedly. ‘He'll be much more comfortable in the kitchen — always used to like going in there as a little boy, you remember. And I don’t suppose he’s accustomed to have things very formal in the desert.’
“No, Madam, said Dossie, going off to set the dining-room table with the scanty silver that hadn't been sent to the bank.
It was the first time Colonel Walsingham had seen his home since the soldiers took over. He walked round and looked at it all quietly and observantly. It was a beautiful August evening and some of the men were playing baseball in one of the meadows. Others were sunbathing after a dip in the river. The smoke from the cookhouse went up thin and straight into the cloudless blue sky and in the house, at one of the upper windows, a soldier was whistling, throwing in an occasional ‘Da-da de da’. As the Colonel stood looking down from the terrace, a rabbit came out from behind a group of magnolias and began nibbling away at the long grass on the lawn. It moved confidently, taking no notice of the Colonel, as though it didn’t expect to be disturbed.
Dossie had grimly laid out Mrs. Walsingham’s black lace dinner dress and set the open jewel cases on the dressing table, so the old lady looked very handsome sitting opposite her son at dinner. He tried not to laugh at the unexpected sight of old Dossie tottering in and out, hanging onto her dinner wagon like an elderly child learning to walk by supporting itself with a toy horse on wheels. ‘I had no idea that Dossie could cook,’ he said.
‘She hadn't either,’ said Mrs. Walsingham. ‘She’s an invaluable creature in lots of ways. Her trouble is that she hates adjusting to the war and she doesn’t like me to adjust, either. She has always refused to adjust to anything. I sometimes think that if there’s ever a social revolution in England, they'll string Dossie up first before they bother about me.’
Their coffee was waiting for them in the library, where Dossie had been to shake up the sofa cushions and freshly crease The Times before ranging it with The Field and The Spectator on the long velvet stool by the fireplace. This room looks as though nothing had happened, thought the Colonel, strolling over to the window to listen to the distant, nostalgic Canadian singing floating on the quiet air at the back of the house.
‘They've cut down some of the trees,’ he said.
‘They had to, to put up some of their paraphernalia,’ said Mrs. Walsingham. “They were very nice about it. Do you mind, Edward? To tell you the truth, I think it’ — lets in more light and air. It’s altered the view from this side an improvement of the house, but what’s a view? Everything else is changing so fast I suppose we shouldn't bother about trees and water.
He nodded, looking out at the gap where the trees had been. He didn’t know why that depressed him far more than the latrines dug in the paddock where his pony used to snuffle a hay bag, or the boots clumping on bare boards overhead, or even old Dossie trundling her dinner wagon. After Mrs. Walsingham had gone to bed, he found a stick and called the ecstatic spaniel for a walk round the woods. By the time he got back it was twilight, too dark to notice the huts or the trucks in the drive, and he stood for a moment looking up at the dark shape of the house, which now seemed familiar again, like an old friend sitting against the light so that wrinkles were unnoticeable.
Dossie was lurking in wait for him in the hall.
“The whisky-and-soda are in the library, sir,’ she said. ‘Do you wish me to call you at eight o'clock, as usual?’
The Colonel opened-bis mouth to tell her that he didn’t want calling, that she should have gone to bed and left him to find the whisky and soda for himself. He closed it again, for he was aware that Dossie was watching him anxiously. The old woman's eyes seemed to implore him to play their game for a little while longer, to pretend that things were just as they used to be, that their world, which had come to an end, could still be saved. And he heard himself answering meekly, dutifully, ‘Yes call me at eight, will you, Dossie?’