MEETING AT THE PRINGLES’ 6 January 1940
The committee met in the drawing-room at Laburnum Cottage, the home of two ladies invariably known as the Pringle girls. One of the Pringle girls had been wedded and widowed and was now Mrs. Carver. Neither of them was likely to see fifty again, but Pringle girls they remained, their girlishness rather ghoulishly preserved, like the dried flowers and pampas grass that rustled in the draught from the drawing-room door. The room was extremely cold. Although it was a chilly evening, there was no fire in the grate, nothing but a pyramid of more dried vegetable matter — pine cones this time, gilded and backed by a fan of pleated pink paper. It occurred to Mrs. Taylor that the committee would be a good deal cosier in the dining-room, where she had noticed the stout terrier Chappie wheezing on the rug in front of a bright little fire. Tradition, however, demanded that committees should meet in the drawing-room. Mrs. Taylor sighed, crossed her stout legs in their grey woollen stockings, and gazed expectantly at Mrs. Peake, who had risen to address the meeting.
Mrs. Peake explained that the committee had been called together to organise a Hospital Supplies Depot in the village. She was opening proceedings in her capacity as chairman of the local Women’s Voluntary Services because someone had to do it — otherwise there was no reason Miss Craddock, representing the Personal Service League, or Mrs. Taylor, secretary of the Women’s Institute, should not be in the chair.
‘Nonsense, Doris, you do it much better,’ said Miss Craddock briskly.
Mrs. Peake said she just wanted to make it clear that there were going to be no particular bosses on this job and that all the different village interests were going to pool their resources for the one cause. She would now call on Mrs. Carver to tell them more about the scheme, and, before sitting down, she would like to propose that Mrs. Carver, who had done such excellent work in the Great War, should be elected as officer-in-charge of the whole organisation.
‘I second that,’ snapped Miss Craddock.
Mrs. Carver said unconvincingly that it was very nice of everybody, but she didn’t know why it should be her. The committee murmured polite encouragement.
“Well, if I could have Lois to help me,’ Mrs. Carver said, ‘I mean it’s going to be quite a big job. It will take two of us easily.’
The unmarried Pringle girl, folding her arms across her thin bosom, stared gloomily at her sister through her I don’t know whether I'd be much help,’ she said. ‘Inever did have any brains, you know that, Alice.’
‘Then that’s carried unanimously!’ Mrs. Peake cried. ‘Mrs. Carver has kindly promised to be our officer-in-charge, with Miss Lois Pringle as her second-in-command. Although this is such an informal meeting, I think someone ought to take a few notes, don’t you?’
The election was duly recorded by Mrs. Taylor, and the ladies gave their attention to Mrs. Carver.
‘Before we go any further, we've got to decide what work we're going to do and where we're going to do it,’ Mrs. Carver announced. ‘I've been to see one or two people about it already. Lois and I drove in to Sherbury this morning to see Mrs. Peters, the Regional Organiser, and I must say that what she had to say was rather upsetting. In the first place, if we want to make any surgical dressings at all, we must supply a room which can be passed as completely sterile by the medical authorities. Walls and floor washed down every time it’s been used, you know, and all that nonsense. “If you insist on a room like that,” I said to Mrs. Peters, “you won't get a single splint made in any village the length and breadth of England.” I said to her, “In the last war my sister and I made surgical swabs by the thousand just in Mrs. Robertson’s drawing-room - and there wasn’t anything particularly sterile about that.” “Well,” said Mrs. Peters, “I quite see your point, Mrs. Carver, and I can’t say that I’m not in sympathy with you, but those at the minute are the orders from headquarters.”
A babble of dismayed talk broke out. Everyone agreed that it was ridiculous and that there wasn’t a room to meet those requirements in the village.
‘How about the stage at the Village Hall?’ suggested Mrs. Taylor. ‘It’s nice and bare, and I suppose we could get it scrubbed after we used it.’
‘My dear, think of the germs in those curtains,’ said Mrs. Peake, shuddering. ‘All the children acting scenes from As You Like It and simply septic with colds and chicken pox. I really don’t think it would be awfully good. How about the big playroom at the Dysons’?’
Miss Craddock reminded her that the Dysons were sleeping twenty mothers and children evacuated from London.
‘There’s the room at The George,’ said Miss Pringle doubtfully.
‘Good gracious, Lois! You don’t want the dressings to reek of beer, do you?’ Miss Craddock said.
‘Well, if it’s quite agreed that we are unable to produce a pure room in this village,’ Mrs. Peake said playfully, ‘I should like to say that Miss Judd has kindly offered her drawing-room and study for the use of the working party. It’s got a lot to recommend it. It’s central -’
‘That’s another thing,’ said Mrs. Taylor. ‘Now that we haven’t got the petrol, you've got to think how people are going to get in to the Depot.’
Mrs. Peake said that they would have to consider the practicality of having one central Depot and one or two lesser ones in different parts of the village. Lady Buxton had rung her up yesterday and asked if they would like her to start a small working party at Croom, just for tenants’ wives and people around. Mrs. Peake had explained that of course such a party would have to be affiliated as an offshoot of Mrs. Carver's, and that if Mrs. Carver had no objection —
‘Not in the least,’ said Mrs. Carver. “Let her have an offshoot by all means. Let’s hear more about Miss Judd’s drawing-room. I can’t remember if it’s got cupboards or not. In the last war we used to put the work away in cardboard boxes, but in this war I suppose we'll have to be a good deal more fussy.’
After some discussion, Mrs. Taylor was able to record a resolution that it was decided to accept Miss Judd’s kind offer of rooms for the working party.
‘T think we’ll have to start a little subscription for lighting and heating,’ said Mrs. Peake.
‘Yes, we'll have to have some sort of heating,’ agreed Mrs. Carver.
The committee politely hid their lavender knuckles and agreed.
‘It’s wonderful, though, how the dahlias kept on,’ said ‘Mrs. Taylor, ‘They were a sight this year. Our Jane Cowls are really a picture, only we them a little difficult to keep from year to year I don’t know why.’
Mrs. Taylor was led back sternly from tubers to pneumonia jackets by Mrs. Carver, who said that she would write up to the Red Cross for patterns. At first, she supposed, they had better concentrate on such surgical supplies as they would be allowed to make in the septic surroundings of Miss Judd’s drawing-room. She put her glasses in their case and snapped it shut, as though the Regional Organiser’s neck were inside it.
Mrs. Peake, gathering the meeting together with a smiling glance, said, ‘If no other lady has any more questions to ask, I almost think we might adjourn.”
No other lady had. The committee started getting to their feet and inserting their lifeless hands into doeskin gloves. The Pringle girls came to the front door and waved goodbye, first to Miss Craddock, who got on her bicycle and shot off into the twilight, then to Mrs. Peake and Mrs. Taylor, who were going in Mrs. Peake’s car. At the bow window in the dining-room, the figure of the Pringles’ little maid could be seen, mounted on a carved Ashanti stool and struggling wildly among the folds of black rep with which she was completing the Laburnum Cottage blackout.
‘Then I'll ring up Lady Buxton tonight about her offshoot!’ shouted Mrs. Carver.
‘Do!’ cried Mrs. Peake. ‘I know she'll be helpful.”
The ladies drove away and the Pringle girls went indoors to sit by the dining-room fire with Chappie and the wireless. They had missed the six o’clock news, but at nine o'clock the familiar gentlemanly voice told bits about the war and the King and ration cards. After it was over, Mrs. Carver went out into the hall to telephone Lady Buxton. Lois could hear her voice, brisk and cheerful, in the pauses between ‘Tipperary’ and other jolly old favourites that the B.B.C. was relaying from a soldiers’ concert party.
‘It’s a long way to Tipperar-ee —"
‘Of course it’s nonsense!’ Mrs. Carver was shouting into the telephone. ‘I said to Mrs. Peters that you’d never find a perfectly antiseptic room in any village. “In the last war,” I said to her -’
‘But my heart's right there!’ roared the voices of the potential customers in whose service the ladies were being so busy and happy — happier, as a matter of fact, than they had been for the last twenty-one years.