THE DANGER 8 July 1944
Mrs. Dudley's evacuees had gone at last, and an almost supernatural hush had seemed to descend upon the house and garden the moment they left. As joyfully as cats plunging back into a dustbin, they had returned to London, without expressing gratitude or regret, without giving a shadow of a sign that four years of living in the midst of what Mrs. Dudley called Beauty had made the slightest impression on them. The Rudds had remained sturdily impervious to Beauty right up to the last. On a morning when Mrs. Dudley’s magnolias were bursting wide in the sunshine and patches of frosty Alpine blues and yellows were beginning to dapple the rockery, where Mr. Dudley’s terrible old gardening hat could be seen slowly moving, Mrs. Rudd had stood gazing out of the window with an eye only too clearly nostalgic for a good Woolworth’s. ‘Ever so quiet, isn’t it?’ she had said, staring contemptuously at a gentian. ‘Might be miles and miles from everything, really, instead of only ten minutes’ walk from the village.’ “That's what we like about the house,’ Mrs. Dudley had replied, to which Mrs. Rudd had said forgivingly, ‘Well, everyone to his taste, of course,’ and flung the lipsticked stub of her cigarette out into Beauty's face before getting on with her lackadaisical pushing of a mop over the hall parquet.
It had been part of the agreement, when the Rudds arrived, that Mrs. Rudd, besides keeping their own quarters clean, should assist about the house. Both these clauses, Mrs. Dudley had speedily discovered, were mere light-hearted figures of speech, for Mrs, Rudd was a slut. The word seemed to have been invented for her. Now that the Rudds had gone, now that the beautiful, incredible silence had settled down over a house empty of strangers again, the full horror of Mrs. Rudd could be relished, like the details of an appalling illness mercifully past: the mane of yellow hair which became brunette an inch from the parting, the broad bottom in navy-blue slacks. Mrs. Rudd had donned trousers at the beginning of the war and was perpetually ready to hoist the yardarm or do any other athletic exercises which might be required of her. For shopping in the village, Mrs. Dudley, who was conservative, had considered that the costume was excessive, but Mrs. Rudd had clung to the navy-blue pants, to which she had added a revealing sweater on chilly days and a flimsy blouse, unbuttoned to interesting limits, on hot ones. In winter, to prove that she was a cut above the ordinary evacuee caste, Mrs. Rudd had also donned a short jacket, made out of the fur of some depressed, yellowish animal that, like Mrs. Rudd’s hair, seemed somewhat undecided at the partings. Mr. Dudley, leaving his garden long enough to potter down to the village and collect his monthly bottle of Scotch, always shrank back nervously into the shop if he spotted the Rudd cavalcade coming up the street — Sonny in the push chair, Marlene and Marina trotting either side of the jaunty maternal behind. It was curious, he reported mildly to Mrs. Dudley, what a really libidinous effect high heels had when combined with tight trousers, a fur monkey jacket, and shoulder-length golden hair. He had mentioned a few Biblical characters of whom he had been irresistibly reminded as he watched their evacuee languidly shopping for Marina’s corn flakes and Sonny's Syrup of Figs.
Mrs. Rudd had also departed from the usual evacuee pattern by having a husband with her, a silent, seemingly melancholy man who was employed by a firm which had moved its files and office staff out of bombing reach. To Messrs. Brown, Clutterbuck & Brown's sudden stout conviction that the worst of the blitzes was over, Mrs. Dudley now owed the unspeakable beatitude of being rid of the Rudds. She could hardly believe that she would never again have to listen to the marital difficulties, the embarrassing confidences, which had oozed from Mrs. Rudd as she slapped a duster over the drawing-room china of a morning. Sometimes Mrs. Dudley had felt her colour deepening guiltily when she encountered Mr. Rudd and his pipe mooning round the garden in the evenings. ‘Still waters run deep,’ Mrs. Rudd had often significantly observed, with a side swipe of the duster at some particularly frail Chelsea nymph. “There’s no knowing with those quiet types, is there? I suppose I didn’t ought to have married Harold, really. When I had my figure, there were no heights I couldn't have attempted, the variety stage included.’ ‘Well, you've got your children as compensation,’ Mrs. Dudley would suggest soothingly. And Mrs. Rudd would admit that there were always the kiddies — or the kidlets, as she some- times, in moments of acute maternal affection, called them. Marlene and Marina seemed to be trying to make up for her disappointment over the variety stage by eternally practising the dancing, their soiled hair ribbons waggling up and down, their small, sharp faces solemn as they hoofed in almost perfect unison on the gravel or along the passage, when Mr. Dudley was taking an afternoon nap. Sonny, a pasty-faced child, lived on a diet of his own and his parents’ sweet ration, alternated with copious draughts of Syrup of Figs. Mrs. Rudd dealt out sticky kisses and smart cuffs impartially to her brood, but when Mrs. Dudley’s married sons, John and Andrew, came down on leave, her tigerish fondness for the kidlets seemed to wane. On these occasions the rolling blue eye and the voluptuous curves appeared to roll and curl even more suggestively, her blouses get more flimsy, their buttons still more precarious. ‘My God, that woman!’ Andrew had groaned, raiding Mr. Dudley’s Scotch after a sudden ambush in the rose garden. ‘She’s a shocker. You'll have to get rid of her, Mother. Ring up Miss Sykes and say they'll have to find her another billet.’
‘I've rung up Nancy Sykes until I’m tired of it,’ Mrs. Dudley said despairingly. ‘She always says that this is the only house that can take them all, and she prefers not to split up families. Sometimes I think they’re here forever.’
The taxi had come for them, finally. Sonny’s push chair had been strapped on top. Mr. Rudd had seemed to be on the verge of struggling to say something fitting before he gave it up and turned to help with the luggage. For the journey, Mrs. Rudd’s plump calves had emerged from the stern sexlessness of women at war and were sleek in tan rayon below the hem of her check costume. ‘I daresay the place will seem ever so funny without us,’ she exclaimed to Mrs. Dudley, pushing the head of Marina’s kitten back into its basket. Sure enough, after the taxi had disappeared down the drive, with Mr. Rudd waving radiantly like a bride from among the armfuls of flowers which Marina and Marlene had selected from the borders, the place did seem funny. In the silence of the house starting immediately to settle back comfortably into character again, Mrs. Dudley reflected that its inmates could also settle back into character —an elderly couple of quiet interests, getting on with their small, puttering war jobs and their gardening. The brassy nightmare interlude of the Rudds was over.
The house, she thought, seemed not only funny but positively eerie. She stood in the hall, listening for the gramophone, Mrs. Rudd’s cigarette cough, Sonny whining, Marina and Marlene going shuffle, shuffle, stomp, stomp along the kitchen passage, Mrs. Rudd humming ‘Yours’ in a fruity contralto as she slopped tea leaves into the sink. Silence, nothing but rich, soaking silence. ‘Irue, their smell remained in the rooms they had occupied ~ a stale, close smell, in which it was possible to identify face powder, food, Sonny’s white mice, Mr. Rudd’s pipe, and Mrs. Rudd. Mrs. Dudley, violently flinging open windows, wondered whether she should burn a fumigating candle, as though the Rudds had been an infectious disease.
But happiness was beginning to steal over her. She gave up trying to do anything, and went out into the hall and started drifting aimlessly from room to room, luxuriously listening to their emptiness. She couldn’t remember when she had last felt so happy.
There was nothing to warn Mrs. Dudley that this halcyon peace was threatened when, one morning a week or so after the Rudds had left, the front doorbell rang. It was a perfect morning, Mrs. Dudley had just noted contentedly, and the garden was beginning to look its very best. She still could not quite believe that at any moment the kidlets would not come whooping from the rockery, their fists full of her most precious Alpines, or that Mrs. Rudd would not be issuing forth, cigarette dangling from her lips, to shake out a duster and gaze round hungrily for the postman or any stray titbit in trousers to sweeten the howling wilderness. But thank God it was true, thought Mrs. Dudley cheerfully, on her way through her clean, silent house to open the front door.
The girl standing on the doorstep, a thin young woman without a hat, said, ‘Mrs. Dudley? My name is Rachel Craig, and I'ma friend of your daughter-in-law’s. Peg said that you wouldn’t mind my coming along to see you.’
‘Do come in, won't you?’ said Mrs. Dudley. ‘And forgive my looking so untidy. Peg may have told you that, like most people these days, we've got no servants at all. Are you staying somewhere down here?”
‘No,’ the girl said. ‘That's just the point. I’m not staying down here, but I want to be. Peg thought that you might be able to help.”
An appalling suspicion entered Mrs. Dudley's head, but it was too late to do anything — to say that she was the char woman, for instance, and that Mrs. Dudley was out. They sat down in the living-room, round which the visitor gazed appreciatively. ‘How lovely to see a real home again, after all the furnished lodgings I've been in,’ she said. ‘I suppose some time George and I will have a home of our own.’ She smiled at Mrs, Dudley, who smiled warily back. “He's been stationed down here, at the camp over at Fairfield,’ the girl said. ‘Of course he doesn’t know for how long I've been trying to get rooms somewhere near for me and Evelyn — that’s my baby — but everywhere is so full up with evacuees and things, isn’t it? Anyway, I was nearly despairing, and then I ran into Peg in London yesterday, and she said perhaps you'd be willing to take us as paying guests.’
For a wild moment, Mrs. Dudley thought of saying, ‘Look here, I’m alone and in peace for the first time in four years. I’m sick to death of strangers in my house. Won't you please go away?’ But the impulse to be brutally candid passed, and the baser instinct to slide out of it somehow, with as much social grace as possible, overcame Mrs. Dudley. She heard her own voice saying instantly, plausibly, ‘I’m sorry. I'd like to help you out, but I simply haven't the room.’
Mrs. Craig's glance wandered gently round the big living- room and out into the spacious airiness of the hall. ‘Evelyn and I would tuck up in any corner,’ she said. ‘You wouldn't know we were here, really. She’s a very good baby.’
But even good babies yell sometimes, Mrs. Dudley thought. ‘They yell, their napkins simmer perpetually on the stove and festoon the bathroom, they start to crawl and then to toddle like homing pigeons straight for the rockery and the Alpines. The Craigs, coming for weeks, might stay for years, as the Rudds had done. Sonny Rudd had arrived a pasty infant in arms; he had left still pasty but hideously active, capable of all forms of small-boy mischief. And how do I know, thought Mrs. Dudley in a panic, that your George won't turn out to be another quiet type like Mrs. Rudd’s Harold, and you'll tell me about it day in, day out, pinned up against my own kitchen wall, where I can’t escape? She began to explain that there really wasn’t all that space, because she had to keep rooms ready for her sons and their wives when they came on leave. Then there were the grandchildren, who spent their school holidays with her. John’s boy and girl, as she spoke of them, mysteriously multiplied and became troops of boys and girls, pouring home every few weeks with their hockey sticks and cricket bats.
Mrs. Craig, interrupting as though she hadn't really been following, said, ‘I’d be awfully glad to help with the house. I'ma good cook — or George used to think so. You see, if only we could be somewhere not too far away, so that he could see us sometimes, before he gets sent goodness knows where, it will make all the difference.’
With terror in her heart, Mrs. Dudley felt that the Craigs were taking shape, were becoming as threateningly real and three-dimensional as the Rudds. In another moment, the noises ofa fresh set of alien lives would be invading the privacy of her quiet house. She would have to get used all over again to alien sounds —to Mrs. Craig’s way of coughing, of running upstairs, to George’s motor bike on the drive, to their bath water running, their voices murmuring. In another moment she would give in. Feeling hypocritical, hating herself, she said smoothly, ‘I do feel so sorry for all you young people and I wish I could have managed it. But there it is. It’s really too bad of Peg to send you down on a wild-goose chase like this.’
Mrs. Craig’s disappointed face looked suddenly very young and sharp round the cheekbones. The furnished lodgings, thought Mrs. Dudley with a pang, possibly didn’t do very well in the way of food.
After that, the visit crumpled. On their way to the door, Mrs. Dudley suggested a name or two — had she tried there? Yes, Mrs. Craig had. Everywhere was full, Mrs. Craig said, trying to smile and not succeeding, in a perfectly adult way. She shook hands and walked away down the drive, and Mrs. Dudley went briskly back into the house like a woman expecting at any moment a sudden influx of grandchildren. In the living-room she sat down limply, with a feeling of weakness round the knees and drew a long, quivering breath of relief. The danger was over and she felt shamefacedly pleased with herself, as though she had been clever in a way which didn’t bear examining too closely. She began telling herself quickly that it was really too much to ask, coming too soon after four nightmare years of being pressed to the suffocating, slatternly bosom of Mrs. Rudd. I’m not so young as I was, she told herself. I've done my bit and more. Everyone says so.
Presently she glanced at the clock and calculated that Mrs. Craig must be nearly at the station. She wouldn't feel entirely safe until after the London train had gone, though. The familiar light stutter of the little French clock was soothing. The clock, a branch of roses tapping against the window, the claws of the old terrier clicking across the hall parquet — there was not a sound in her own quiet house which she could not identify. We are alone together, they said. We belong to you and to nobody else. She waited for the usual rush of pure happiness to flood over her at the thought, as it had done so many times since the Rudds’ taxi bore them away. But today something was wrong, for nothing happened. Nothing at all thought Mrs. Dudley, staring miserably at the clock, which soon told her that the London train would now be steaming out of the station.