THE WASTE OF IT ALL 16 December 1944
Philip had been in the Middle East for over three years now, and sometimes it seemed to Frances even longer than that. They had been married very soon after meeting each other and he had been sent abroad a few months later. Sometimes, in a panic, Frances would close her eyes and try to remember Philip’s face in detail, how he smiled, how his voice sounded. On good days he came to life perfectly, but if she was tired or depressed she could bring him back only in fragments that wouldn’t connect, like a jigsaw puzzle from which the key pieces were lost. Or if eventually she assembled him, he wouldn’t work in her head. He’d stand looking at her dumbly, not smiling, and she would have the disconcerting feeling that he was some stranger she had met and liked at a party but couldn’t give more than a name and a face to.
Of course letters helped to keep them in touch. Philip wrote long, full letters by every mail, and so did Frances. But sometimes she would be brought up short by the realisation that her chatter was stuffed with all the mental and physical debris acquired in the three years without him — allusions to friends he had never met, books he hadn't read, little jokes which they hadn't laughed at first together — and that Philip must, at times, try to fit together his own jigsaw Frances and fail miserably. Worst of all to her was the awful suspicion that she had almost grown used to doing without him. For the first two years she had missed him unbearably, but now her loneliness was something which she put on automatically when she got up and hardly noticed any more, like a person who had become accustomed to wearing glasses or a false limb.
Frances wrote a lot about the cottage, for she knew that Philip enjoyed the smallest, silliest details. He had wanted, touchingly, to leave her in their own home. He had an old-fashioned wish to frame a woman in a setting which would include a fire, a lamp, and a work box, and he had hated Frances’s undomestic plan of getting into the uniform of the first service that would have her. They had found the cottage on one of his last leaves, a Hans Andersen place into which someone with taste had fitted less elfin modern plumbing and other conveniences. ‘On a good train service to London, too,’ Philip had pointed out. ‘It’s really a buy. If we ever want to sell we'll be able to get twice what we're giving, before the war’s over.’ But she knew that he didn’t want her to sell. He liked thinking of her there, safely anchored, something to come home to. He had always been fond of drawing little plans of things, and his letters were full of diagrams explaining to Frances what she was to have done about a leaking bit of the thatch roof, where the hen house was to go, exactly how he wanted the new apple trees planted. He was a countryman by birth, a Londoner only by adoption, and he loved that sort of thing.
Frances, a Londoner by birth and a countrywoman by adoption, grappled valiantly with thatch, hens, and orchard in the intervals of a full-time job at a government office which had been evacuated to the neighbourhood. A series of women friends and their children had shared the cottage with her. She became used to the light clip of feminine conversation, to light eating on trays. When a man came to the house, his voice ‘seemed to roar like a giant’s and the floors seemed to shudder under his unaccustomed tread.
One day the supply of women friends ran out, and Frances, wildly bicycling round, couldn't find a soul who was free to come and clean the place and have a meal waiting for her when she got home in the evenings. She was on the point of giving up, Philip or no Philip, and retreating thankfully to London, where thatch didn't leak and eggs were to be had conveniently dried from grocery store shelves, when Margaret suddenly happened.
‘I'm delighted about Margaret,’ Philip wrote some weeks later. ‘Now, perhaps, you'll get some decent food to eat. So far as I can make out, you and the girl friends have been getting along on lettuce and cups of tea. Your description of the Home where you found her chilled my blood. Pure Dickens, my God! She must think it’s heaven now she and the kid are with you, darling.’
Frances, folding Philip’s letter, could hear Margaret singing in the kitchen above the sizzle of frying bacon and certainly sounding cheerful. Frances began to drink her coffee, thinking of the Home of the Good Samaritan, to which a friend’s suggestion had sent her. Chilling, she thought, had been the word for it. Sitting uneasily on a hard sofa in the matron’s parlour, a small room smelling frigidly of beeswax and charity, she had looked out into the sunshine where four or five unmarried mothers were pushing prams up and down the gravel walks.
“We have to be very careful, of course, where we place our girls,’ the matron was saying. ‘Once they make a mistake of this kind, they so often get into — well, the habit, you might say.’ She looked at Frances piercingly, as though suspecting her of keeping a bordello. ‘You say you're at work all day. Would Margaret be likely to see any men while you're out?”
Frances thought swiftly of the lad who delivered the papers, a grubby urchin of twelve, and of old Bostock, the gardener, who hobbled in two afternoons a week to dig the vegetables. She felt justified in answering, ‘None, absolutely none,’ and the matron, after thoughtful survey of Frances’s wedding ring, agreed that Margaret and the baby should go to her next day.
‘The father won't worry you — that’s one thing,’ the matron said. ‘One of these soldiers — married, of course. Somewhere on the Continent now, I suppose, and never a thought for the poor girls, you may be sure.’ She sniffed and her uniform crackled indignantly.
‘It’s a lovely baby anyway,’ said Frances. “They always are,’ said the matron, sniffing again, as though she would have preferred the wages of sin to be a little less blatantly plump, dimpled, and thriving.
Frances wrote back to Philip and told him that it was a great success. Margaret was a good cook and, in her satisfaction at being delivered out of the Samaritan bosom, she cleaned the place with a ferocity which echoed in Frances’s ears as she bicycled off in the mornings. Margaret was a big, fat girl with a remarkably plain face; Frances could only suppose that the acute homesickness of one of the visiting warriors had been responsible for Margaret's baby, Raymond. None of the friends who had shared the cottage had had very young children, and it was extraordinary what a difference Raymond made in the household. Frances had always felt that the cottage had the shallow, rootless air of a temporary wartime home, but now it began to look as though the people living there didn’t intend to move away. Washing billowed permanently from Margaret's line between the two old pear trees. Frances had managed to borrow a pram and a cot, which old Bostock had fixed up, and Raymond slept or philosophically examined the sky all day out on the little patch of lawn.
At the beginning, thinking of Bostock, of the milk girl, whose nose was an inquisitive red button as she clumped past the pram with the bottles, Frances had said to Margaret, “Would it be easier ifwe called you Mrs. Judd? It might sort of settle things, mightn’t it?’
‘I wouldn't feel natural as a missis,’ Margaret said comfortably. ‘Miss Judd I am and Miss Judd I'll probably stop, and Raymond will have to take it as he finds it. There'll be plenty like him, I daresay.’
Frances had carried the baby out of the kitchen and was playing with him on the living-room sofa. ‘Why did you call him Raymond?’ she asked. ‘Was it his father’s name?”
‘No, it wasn’t,’ said Margaret. ‘His father’s name was George - or he said it was, anyway.’ She laughed. ‘But I always thought if I got married and had a little boy, I'd call him Raymond. Well, the war happened and I didn’t get married, but I got Raymond.’
‘It's a beautiful name,’ Frances said warmly.
She bought some wool and began knitting for the baby in the evenings. He had very few clothes or other possessions, and when she went to London for a couple of days’ leave, she found that he kept coming into her thoughts, and she bought a little hairbrush with a pale-blue back, a rattle, and a blue sleeping bag. ‘If your baby is an active little fellow, this will keep him snug in all weathers,’ the saleswoman had said as she folded up the sleeping bag, and Frances, somehow enjoying the atmosphere of this shop, where every customer was automatically a mother, said seriously, ‘Well, yes, he is the active type of baby.’ She felt matronly and amused with herself, and wondered if the saleswoman’s eyeglasses would focus less starrily if she knew that the sleeping bag was intended to wrap a nameless Baby Bunting, whose daddy had gone a-hunting and wasn’t likely to come back. ‘Won't he love the ducky pink rabbit on it!’ snuffled the saleswoman with a damp blend of sentiment and catarrh. Here mother- hood was strictly the legitimate article. Frances, conscientiously building up detail, stopped and fingered some tiny night- dresses, assuming the correct brooding expression, on her way to the door. Once outside, she relaxed and began thinking what a funny description she would make out of her shopping in her next letter to Philip. But somehow, though she had been entertained while it was happening, it no longer seemed particularly amusing when she got home, and she put the idea out of her head rather abruptly.
Her homecoming was really very pleasant. There was a letter from Philip waiting for her, and Margaret had got splendid fires going and something good cooking for supper. About a month before, Frances had bought a puppy, because everyone said that a dog was such good company. He was a spaniel puppy, christened Bruce, and now, in a frenzy of welcome, he rushed round the room, fell on her shoes, and sprinkled her affectionately with water. Raymond was also brought in to see her, and though she had been away only two days, she insisted that he had grown. He was really beautiful - not in the least like Margaret, she thought. The unknown George must have been good-looking. Raymond's small face was an obvious duplicate of someone’s strong family face which for generations had been transmitting bright-blue eyes, fresh colour, and a straight nose. Frances thought what a sensation he would have caused if she had been able to take him along and show him off to that woman who had burbled about the ducky pink rabbit.
She produced the sleeping bag and other things and Margaret flushed with pleasure. ‘It’s beautiful!’ she said again and again.
“Well, we shan’t have to worry now about keeping him warm in the garden,’ Frances said lightly.
She sat down to read Philip's letter, with Bruce cuddled beside her. The little fret of someone besides herself in the room was oddly companionable. There was no doubt, she thought, a dog did make a difference, and spaniels were always so devoted. She stroked his curly ears absently as she read. Philip wrote gloomily, for he had thought that he was getting leave and it had fallen through. He had taken bets that the war would be over by Christmas, but now he was feeling less certain. ‘What I mind most is the waste of it all,’ he wrote. ‘Waste of time, waste of you, waste of the good things ‘we could be doing together.’ Later on he made an obvious effort to sound more cheerful, and went into details of some plan for the garden, illustrated with one of his usual neat little maps. Although the time he had spent at the cottage could be counted in days, every inch of its terrain, every twig, every stone seemed to be printed photographically on his memory. It’s really the only link we've had, Frances thought. The only place we've known together, the sticks and stones we share.
Frances put down Philip's letter and sat looking into the fire. She could hear Margaret and Raymond in the kitchen. He had his bath in the evening and usually she enjoyed watching, but this evening she didn’t feel in the mood. Margaret had put down the sleeping bag and other odds and ends when she drew the curtains and she had forgotten to take them to the kitchen with her. Frances picked up the hairbrush and began turning it over in her hands. It had flowers hand-painted on its blue back, and it struck her that perhaps it had been idiotic to choose such frivolities for one whose path would possibly not be particularly flowery. Margaret might take him away at any time and, if she did, Frances hated to think what might happen to them. Maybe it was silly to spoil him like this, as though life could guarantee to wrap him permanently in softest blue wool, guarded by ducky pink rabbits, amused by a bauble of little bells tied up with corals. Frances could hear the splashing of water in the kitchen and a gurgle of enjoyment from Raymond, then Margaret’s voice murmuring something. Unexpectedly Frances felt a pang of irritation against Margaret for having been so stupid or so wanton that Raymond must always be bathed in front of some stranger's fire. Now that she came to think oft, the girl’s jolly, phlegmatic acceptance of her lot was also irritating. That business about being called Mrs. Judd, for instance. If she had thought at all of Raymond's future, she would have fallen in with that suggestion. Frances could have bought her a wedding ring, and they could have agreed on some tale of widowhood which would sound plausible in a village full of women whose men had died as far from home, as quietly, as Frances would have arranged for George to die. She couldn't help feeling indignant when she thought how casual Margaret had been about everything. She's really nothing but a stupid peasant, Frances thought angrily.
Somehow, somewhere, the pleasantness of getting home had escaped. Frances picked up Philip’s letter to read it again, and then, for the first time, she noticed that Bruce had got down from the sofa. The little dog was standing beside the door that led into the kitchen; he was snuffling deeply under the crack and every now and then he scratched hopefully. He liked Margaret, who had a way with animals. Once or twice lately, Frances had searched for him and found him curled up on the kitchen chair, and, though she had laughed, she had always carried him out firmly and closed the door tightly behind her. Now he was scratching and whining to get in. Frances called to him sharply. He took no notice and a wave of quite ridiculous anger seized her. She got up, took the puppy by the scruff of his neck so roughly that he squeaked protestingly, and dumped him back on the sofa. ‘You stay where you are!’ she told him, and as she hit him across his blunt baby nose, she could hardly see him for the tears in her eyes and the dreadful empty feeling in her heart.