MRS. RAMSAY’S WAR 27 January 1940
It was before lunch on a dark January day in the Ramsays’ country cottage in Sussex. Just how dark January could be, Mrs. Ramsay reflected gloomily, no one would ever know who had not spent it in a delightful little Tudor gem with a wealth of old oak and several interesting original features (such as the beam on which you knocked your head outside the bathroom). The log fire was smoking in its interesting original way and an angry hiss of plumbing told the exact whereabouts of Nannie Hunter and her charge. Mrs. Ramsay was brooding over the tendency of these fascinating old houses to filter noise upwards and downward when the door opened and Mrs. Parmenter came in, carrying a bunch of snowdrops in one hand and a small vase in the other.
‘I just had to run out between the showers and get a few,’ she said. ‘A room never looks like home without flowers, don’t you agree, dear?’
Mrs. Ramsay thought it would take the Chelsea Flower Show to make this one feel like home but that perhaps it was beginning to feel like Mrs. Parmenter’s home. Mrs. Parmenter was Alison Hunter’s mother, a widow who lived in a handsome flat in Prince’s Gate. When war broke out, Mrs. Hunter had rung up and asked if Mrs. Ramsay would have her little girl and Nannie to stay for the duration down at the Sussex cottage. Mrs. Hunter herself was driving an ambulance and couldn't leave town,
‘Camilla will be nice company for your Susan,’ she had said.
Mrs. Ramsay mentioned mildly that Alan Carpenter and his nurse were staying there too, so Susan would have quite a party. Mrs. Hunter then asked if Mrs. Ramsay could possibly have Mrs. Parmenter — for a bit, anyway. Mrs. Ramsay had replied firmly that she couldn’t possibly do it, but Mrs. Hunter had said that Mummy would be no trouble because she would bring Jessie to help in the house, and that the whole party would arrive on Tuesday.
‘You’ve taken such a load off my mind, Helen darling,’ she had said, ringing off, and on Tuesday the load had arrived as advertised, in a hired Daimler which bulged with Mrs. Parmenter, Camilla on Nannie’s knee, several rolls of bedding, the parlourmaid, two Pekinese, and a quantity of luggage.
All autumn Mrs. Parmenter had run out between the showers and picked the asters, saying brightly that an old woman must be allowed to do something around the house. Opposition would hardly have been hysterical if she had offered to make the beds, but her tastes appeared to be floral. Now it was January and the snowdrops, and before you knew where you were, Mrs. Ramsay thought morbidly, it would be May and the tulips. Somehow she had never expected to spend the war having a Battle of Flowers with Mrs. Parmenter.
‘Such a nasty day,’ said Mrs. Parmenter, standing off from the vase to see the effect. ‘San Toy has got his asthma again, poor little dog.’
Mrs. Ramsay said quickly that she was afraid the cottage was damp and wasn't really meant for a winter home.
‘But how we shall revel in the spring when it comes!’ cried Mrs. Parmenter. ‘There! Don’t their brave little faces give you fresh hope?’ Mrs. Ramsay felt that it would take more than a few snowdrops to give her fresh hope. It would take something really big, like the back end of a Daimler loaded with Parmenter luggage going rapidly towards London.
Mrs. Parmenter, abandoning the brave little faces and adopting a steelier note, asked if Yum-Yum could have less potato in his dinner today.
‘I'm afraid your nice cookie doesn’t quite understand how drefful spoilt my little fellows are,’ she said.
Jessie came tripping through the hall and sounded the gong, nostalgia for Prince’s Gate written large in every loop of her crisp organdie bows. She then retreated into the dining- room, and a confused roaring noise announced that the children were coming downstairs for the communal nursery lunch. Everyone got wedged into the room somehow, bibs were hitched round necks, and a subterranean wheezing located Mrs. Parmenter’s little fellows right under their patron’s chair. Mrs. Ramsay, carving the lamb and listening to the nurses babbling of cardigan patterns, thought moodily that this kind of thing might go on for years. Of course it would be fascinating to watch the children growing up right under one’s eyes. The girls would become young women almost imperceptibly and Mrs. Parmenter would be running out between the showers to pick the roses for Camilla’s wedding bouquet.
Mrs. Parmenter was asking if she had heard from Charles. ‘It must be such a comfort to you, dear, to know that he’s safe, at any rate,’ she said, ‘and such a comfort to him to feel that you’re being well looked after.’ Her roguish eye implied that without her restraining chaperonage Mrs. Ramsay would be helling around Sussex, probably in the nude.
Mrs. Ramsay, smiling wanly, said that she didn’t know ifan anti-aircraft gun near an arsenal was so terribly safe, really, but Mrs. Parmenter said that she'd heard on good authority that the Germans were not going to send over many raids.
‘This came straight from Winnie Carruthers, whose nephew is something very high up in the War Office, so I think we can rely on it,’ she said.
Mrs. Ramsay resisted the impulse to ask why, if Winnie Carruthers’ nephew was as reliable as all that, Mrs. Parmenter and Jessie were not sitting cosily in Prince’s Gate. All the children ate very slowly, apparently acting on the Gladstonian principle of thorough mastication. Their nurses urged them on, still chattering of cardigans.
‘What is it, Jessie?’ asked Mrs. Parmenter, inspecting the steamed apple pudding, which Jessie proffered, as though it were straight from the recipe book of the Borgias. Then she said that if Mrs. Ramsay’s nice cookie wouldn't be offended, she would just take a little fresh fruit.
After lunch the nurses, hung round with gas masks, took the children for a walk. Mrs. Ramsay wanted to write to Charles, but Mrs. Parmenter was at the writing table, so she went out to find the gardener, a dour and hairy man who seldom if ever talked of cardigans. He said nothing about revelling in the spring but prophesied the failure of all the early crops and aimed a clod of earth at one of Mrs. Parmenter’s little fellows who was delicately scratching in the onion bed. Mrs. Ramsay found him a great comfort. When she got back to the house, Mrs. Parmenter was still at the writing table.
That evening Susan, saying good night, remarked that she didn’t want Camilla and Alan to go, ever. Mrs. Ramsay felt impelled to hit her smartly over the head but instead went downstairs to the living-room, where Mrs. Parmenter was knitting under the good light and listening to the wireless.
‘I was just thinking, dear, that if you had no objection I might get a few of my own things down from Prince's Gate,’ she said. ‘One does miss one’s own bits and pieces, don’t you agree?”
Mrs. Ramsay, picking her way among suspiciously growling Pekinese, remembered with a good deal of wistful- ness the poet’s assurance that the grave was a fine and private place.
After the nine o'clock news bulletin, Mrs. Parmenter let Yum-Yum and San Toy into the garden, where they disappeared in a frenzy of yapping. ‘They feel they’re guarding me,’ said Mrs. Parmenter indulgently. ‘Silly little Yum-Yum, don’tyou know that it’s not our home, sweetheart?’ Mrs.  Ramsay felt that it was, though. 