IN CLOVER 13 April 1940
At the time the London évacués had come to the village, Miss Vereker, the billeting officer, had looked up from her list and said to Mrs. Clark, ‘You're going to be lucky. You're going to Mrs. Fletcher at the Manor.’ She had smiled as she spoke, the flashing and more than necessarily kind smile that she reserved for the lower orders, who hadn't, don’t you know, had quite the advantages that we have.
None of the Clarks had smiled back at the chintzy lady in the broad hat, sitting with pencil poised as though she were making out a bulb order. Dazed, poor creatures, by the journey, Miss Vereker decided. The baby, sitting impassively in its mother's arms, wore a dirty red knitted cap in which it oddly resembled a wizened old sans-culotte, a mummified Marat with a’snotty nose. It was overpoweringly evident that Mrs. Clark was again — expectant, Miss Vereker delicately phrased it to herself, without noticing that the word didn’t fit in very well with Mrs. Clark’s air of dully awaiting a blow over the head with a blunt instrument. She said quickly, ‘I do hope they've given you a nice cup of tea. A cup of tea does so pull one together, don’t you think?’ Mrs. Clark said hoarsely that she’d had one, and Miss Vereker remembered having observed the party being refreshed across the room, the infant Marat taking a swig from the saucer, So there was nothing to do but give the woman and her three children their labels and send them up to the manor in charge of one of the Girl Guides. Watching the party trail to the door, she wondered doubtfully if dear little Mrs. Fletcher really had known what she was letting herself in for when she volunteered to take in a few of the London évacués.
Little Mrs. Fletcher, it turned out, hadn't an idea. She had two babies of her own and a husband in the Guards, but her notions about all three were pretty innocent. On the afternoon her nurse went out, the harsher facts of infant life were concealed from her by the nursery maid, who let her have fun pretending to fool around with two little dears who were always perfectly dry, perfectly sweet-smelling, and done up in frilly organdie tied with ribbons. Her first sight of the dreadful Clark baby shook her a good deal. It was the same with pregnancy, which she associated with chaise-longues, dreamy meanderings through layette catalogues, and ‘cloud’ dinner dresses that were supposed to blur the unromantic aspects of the affair in layers of chiffon. There was something about the straining third button of Mrs. Clark’s jacket that upset Mrs. Fletcher. Of course, she was perfectly sensible about it. She had known that her guests were coming from one of the poorest parts of London and it was natural they should look dingy, but she had imagined a medium dinginess that would wear off with one or two good scrubbings and a generous handout of gingham pinafores. The dinginess of the Clarks, which seemed to have soaked in far deeper than just their skins, was a setback, but Mrs. Fletcher met it with her most charming smile. She even drew one of the children towards her as she talked, and stood with an arm round his bony shoulders, trying not to shudder, thinking that she must take a good hot bath before she went anywhere near the nursery.
‘I do hope you'll be comfortable,’ she said to Mrs. Clark. ‘It used to be the chauffeur’s flat until he moved into a cottage. There’s a nice bathroom and a little kitchen, and a gas ring in the sitting room that will come in handy for heating up your baby’s bottles and things.’ Then, flustered by the silent, staring Clarks, she cried, ‘And now I know what you'd like! You'd like a nice cup of tea.’
The Clarks heard her without surprise. By now they were used to smiling ladies, old or young, who urged them distractedly to have a nice cup of tea.
Mrs. Fletcher was sensible about the various other setbacks that she encountered in the following weeks. When the young Clarks proved to be no more house-trained than the six- week-old poodle puppy her husband had given her for her birthday, Mrs. Fletcher went up to town in the Rolls and ordered two or three new mattresses and another bale of fleecy peach-coloured blankets; it was really as simple as that. Something told her that none of the servants would welcome the idea of going over and cleaning up for Mrs. Clark, who was obviously incapable of cleaning up for herself, so Mrs. Fletcher hired a village woman, who came up and indignantly shook out mops and flung open windows for an hour every morning. Even this lady’s activities were unable to get the smell out of the place. There didn’t seem to be a disinfectant invented that could drown the Clark smell of grinding, abject poverty, very different from the decent, cottage variety with a red geranium on the window sill, which had been the worst Mrs. Fletcher had encountered up to now.
As the weeks went by, the Clarks began to get her down. happening in Europe, there were still things Mrs. Fletcher would have been unable to help enjoying — simple things, like fine mornings, and the colours the trees were turning, and crumpets for tea by the fire with the dogs attentive and the children being brought down afterwards in their best smocks. Her husband was away, but then all the husbands were away. The old butler was the only man in the house, but flowers were sent in regularly from the greenhouses, her breakfast coffee tasted the same; she was twenty-four years old;in splendid th, and it would have been impossible not to laugh nor d then, even though the radio in the library kept on saying those dreadful things: If it hadn’t been for the Clarks.
That rickety little procession, staggering on mean legs across the pattern of Mrs. Fletcher’s day, seemed like the first warning crack in the safe, dependable fabric of existence. inwasn't the same: Perhaps it never would be again. She would wake in the night and start thinking about the Clarks, and the next morning she would drop in at the chauffeur’s flat to have a cosy, woman- to-woman chat with Mrs. Clark. It never worked out well, though. Mrs. Fletcher tried to talk to Mrs. Clark as she would have talked to any young mother, but it was difficult to think of this flabby creature with the shocking teeth as a young mother. The horrifying notion made Mrs. Fletcher's ears turn rosy among her foxes as she fumbled through her attempts at interplanetary communication, the children standing round her chair, their heads too large and wise above their pot-bellied bodies.
‘I do hope you'll tell me if there’s anything you want,’ she would say earnestly, hopeful that it might all simplify down to something which could be settled by the stroke of a pen on acheque.
At Christmas, the father came to see them. Mrs. Fletcher’s husband was home, too. ‘My God, what a specimen!’ Captain Fletcher said as they passed the Clarks in the lime avenue, Mr. Clark trundling the infant Marat in a push-chair. Mrs. Fletcher sighed. Mr. Clark’s cough floated back to them, resigned and dispirited, like the droop of the shoulders under his shabby coat.
‘How are they going to bear it when the war’s over and they have to go back?’ she said.
“Time enough to start worrying about that when the war's over,’ her husband suggested comfortably.
The war was still going on, however, the morning Miss Vereker, summoned by telephone, pedalled up the lime avenue on her bicycle, bending her head to keep the spring rain out of her eyes. Poor little Mrs. Fletcher, she thought. It really was too bad. She could hardly wait to give up her Burberry and rubbers to the butler before darting in to tell Mrs. Fletcher how bad it was.
‘Taking those poor children back to London just as the air raids may be going to start! And in her condition, with everything so imminent, don’t you know.’ Mrs. Fletcher was still at breakfast; Miss Vereker refused coffee abstractedly. ‘It’s really too disheartening, my dear, after all you did for them.’
‘I thought that they'd settled down. They seemed to be comfortable,’ Mrs. Fletcher said helplessly.
‘Comfortable? Why, they were in clover!’ cried Miss Vereker. ‘Did the woman give any reason for going, or did she simply walk out on you?’
Mrs. Fletcher crumbled a curl of Melba toast. ‘No, she gave a reason. She said that she couldn’t be away from her ‘husband any more. She just wanted to go home.’
Mrs. Fletcher looked flushed and astonished, almost as though she was going to cry. There were various other details to discuss, for after the Clarks had gone it turned out that the chauffeur’s quarters weren't in a very nice condition. It was probably best to be on the safe side and burn nearly everything.
“The expense those ungrateful wretches have put you to!’ Miss Vereker said.
Mrs. Fletcher only wished the rest of the Clark episode could be disposed of so easily. She had a dreadful feeling that something of the Clarks would be there for keeps, making her uncertain, making her believe what the library radio would tell her, even though her breakfast coffee smelled good in its spode cup and the young gardener, kneeling out in the hall with his back to her, was cunningly hiding the ugly freesia pots in a good, deep layer of moss. 