IT’S THE REAL THING THIS TIME 15 June 1940
Major Marriot lived with his unmarried sister in a charming cottage, one of the hundreds all over England which, built for the British workingman, are ending their days in gentility as homes for the poor but snug gentry. Chintzes fluttered at its doll windows and a pretty card, hand-painted by Miss Marriot, warned ‘Heads!’ above the lopsided front door, which usually stood ajar and treated passers-by to a glimpse of an arsenal of Zulu shields, bows, and assagais. The Major, who was a tall man, a grizzled Adonis with a bristling cavalry moustache and a complexion midway between strong Ceylon tea and pigskin, somehow contrived to maintain his erect military bearing, although most of his waking hours were spent in a crouching position, either dodging beams indoors or squatting in the garden weeding. Both he and his sister were fervent gardeners. Little Mrs. Trent, whose husband was in France and who often felt lonely, knew she could find them working on most fine days, the Major busy among the vegetables, Miss Marriot tying up the clematis and wearing a dress so flowery that many foiled bees buzzed angrily round her fora moment before going on to the less deceiving columbines.
‘Come in and have a glass of sherry,’ Miss Marriot would cry through a mouthful of raffia. “You're just in time for the six o'clock news. Gerald! Here is Mrs. Trent!”
The Major was always ready to leave the lettuces and come and twinkle gallantly at a pretty face. He had a soft corner in his heart for Mrs. Trent. Once, when she told him she had heard from her husband the day before but that there hadn’t been any real news about the war because they weren't, of course, allowed to say much, his small, bloodshot eyes rested on her tenderly and he groaned, “There never is any real news. They aren’t goin’ to tell us anything. Did you hear the guns this morning?’ Mrs. Trent said yes, she had heard them. ‘Just practice firin’,’ said the Major, mournfully. ‘For a moment I thought it might be the real thing,’ and he glanced wistfully into the hall, where Mrs. Trent knew that all the paraphernalia of an air-raid warden was laid out on a small table under the assagais. The various pieces of equipment were arranged as neatly as though they were silver bric-a-brac —a whistle, a hand rattle, packets of field dressings, bleach paste for gas casualties, and a large bell which the Major was going to brandish somehow in the intervals between rattling and whistling. Occasionally, Mrs. Trent had seen the Major pick up the rattle, look at it longingly, and put it down again, like a small boy with a parcel which he knows he mustn't open till Christmas.
One evening shortly after the fighting started in Norway, Mrs. Trent went indoors with the Marriots to listen to their radio and drink their sherry. The Major liked the radio turned up so loud that the glossy pink cheeks of Miss Marriot’s Staffordshire figures seemed to wobble on their shuddering bracket. A portrait of some military ancestor in a red coat had been removed to make room for an enormous map of Scandinavia, into which the Major ferociously jabbed flags on pins as he shouted at the radio, “Turn their flank, you fools!’ and ‘That's what you get for mechanisin’ all the cavalry!’ The cottage smelled of furniture cream, lavender in bowls, and of the vegetable curry that the maid was preparing for the evening meal — fiery-hot to please the Major’s palate, full of vitamins for Miss Marriot. Sipping his whisky-and- water, the Major said gloomily, ‘If only they'd ask me, I could tell em something. But when those fellas at the War House put you on the shelf—’ and he got up to lunge a flag into the map as though he wished itwere an assagai between German shoulder blades.
Mrs. Trent knew, of course, how he had offered his services to the country in the early days of the war. She had seen him setting off for the station, debonair in his town clothes and spats, with a late rosebud in his buttonhole. ‘Just runnin’ up to have a chat with someone at the War House!’ he had shouted over the hedge, not forgetting to shoot her the tender, killing glance which made her see what a charmer he must have been, even after that polo pony broke his nose and the Afghan bullet took a nick out of one eyebrow. It was all very painful when he walked the spaniel along to her house and dropped in for a drink late that evening. He was drooping like the rosebud that was still in his buttonhole, and she had to be very fluttering and helpless, to be a silly little woman over finding the whisky decanter and mixing his nasty man’s drink, before he bucked up and told her, with a charming, naive conceit, how surprised the fellas at the War House had been when they learned his real age. ‘I fancy they’d placed me a good ten years younger,’ he said with a chuckle; it had been no good, they had told him politely they didn’t want him. ‘Just a dugout,’ he said, making a joke of it, and sat looking like the spaniel, jowly and mournful, staring with red, blinking eyes out at the English elms that refused to turn into French poplars, the evening sky in which there was a star but never a Very light.
When Germany invaded Holland and Belgium, the tallboy and a couple of sporting prints had to be shifted to make room for another tremendous map, over which the Major brooded lovingly, whistling through his teeth. ‘It’s beginnin’ at last, ‘pon my soul it is,’ he said. ‘Yes; we're in it now, every ‘man, woman, and child of us.’ He took a cigarette and fitted it into his long ivory holder, smiling dreamily to himself. His eyes were very bright. ‘Yes, it’s the real thing this time,’ he said happily. Mrs. Trent didn’t see him or Miss Marriot for the next day or two, so she didn’t know whether he had gone up to town again to interview the War Office. Then one evening she took the dogs for a run past the Marriots’ cottage. The windows were already blacked out, and she was somewhat startled to see a figure standing motionless in the twilight under the apple trees. It turned out to be the Major, staring intently upwards and nursing a gun. He was keepin’ a sharp lookout, he explained, at dawn and dusk, as the authorities had requested. “They dropped the poor devils by parachute in Holland. I shouldn't be a bit surprised if that fella was mad enough to try it here,’ he said hopefully.
He shifted the gun from one arm to the other and looked up again at the sky. Mrs. Trent could see in the half-light that he was smiling sweetly as he sometimes smiled at her, with the rakish twinkle of the born charmer, the absent-minded tenderness of a man who loved women and danger but had somehow ended up with Miss Marriot and a warden’s rattle beneath crossed assagais. The Major looked up for the falling body of a German soldier like a lover watching for a sign from a stubbornly closed window.
“Yes, I shouldn't be surprised if we aren't in for a packet of trouble,’ he said.