THIS FLOWER, SAFETY 6 July 1940
Miss Mildred Ewing had lived at the Hotel San Remo, Crumpington-on-Sea, since the beginning of the war. Her London house, one of those vast, dirty stucco fortresses of the past that are still to be seen in the squares of Belgravia, was untenanted except for an old caretaker living in the basement. Although the rooms had been put away carefully under dust sheets, their contents packed in newspapers or tenderly wrapped in baize, the dust had probably seeped in to lie in the dulling mahogany curlicues of the Chippendale chairs, the Georgian silver must be tarnishing slowly, the china cupids acquiring a film of grey on their dimpled pink thighs. Miss Ewing thought of this gradual disintegration of her property with calm, even with indifference. Before the war cut her life so sharply in two, she had cherished her possessions jealously. The best of the silver had mounted to bed with the butler every night; rather than risk the slapdash methods of the modern housemaid, Miss Ewing had washed the china cupids herself, with her sleeves rolled high on her thin arms and her diamond rings in a little pile beside the basin. Now that she had discovered the important truth that her flesh was as brittle as theirs and far more precious, the safety of china cupids had become irrelevant.
Miss Ewing was safe at Crumpington-on-Sea. She and her elderly maid, Sparks, enjoyed the security of that sunny little watering place, which was sometimes quite like the Riviera, really. Sparks enjoyed it a good deal more than the previous annual sojourns in Nice or Mentone. What with the library and a couple of cinemas and the Crumpington Pavilion, where a women’s orchestra played jolly operatic selections at teatime, Sparks found plenty of entertainment for every minute of the day, and it was nice not to have people speaking a foreign lingo round you. She quickly found cronies, too, for there were other elderly ladies with maids staying at the San Remo. At dinner, the white heads made the dining-room look like a cotton field at harvest; if the war news was ‘upsetting’, they became tremulous and the diamond earrings bobbed and quivered in the frail old ears. Miss Ewing and the other ladies dreaded bad news, because it reacted distressingly on their digestive system, causing quite a run on sodamints at the chemist’s and a constant pattering of feet in the upper corridors of the hotel during the small hours of the morning. On the whole, however, the war seemed reassuringly remote from this cheerful haven - from the attentive headwaiter respectfully suggesting a nice Graves and the Crumpington Pavilion ladies merrily scraping away at Carmen. Everyone said that Crumpington-on-Sea was the safest place in England. One spring day, Mrs. Prentiss received a letter which she read aloud in the lounge. The letter was from her son, who was something high up in the War Office, and it said what a great relief it was to feel that Mrs. Prentiss was there, well out of the way of air raids. Hearing high authority's assurance that they had picked a good spot, Miss Ewing and the other ladies nodded at each other pleasantly over their knitting; all the teagown laps were full of khaki and navy-blue wool that would end up as comforts for the brave boys who were having such a horrid time somewhere so that the Graves could arrive properly chilled on Miss Ewing’s table and Mrs. Prentiss could be lugged in a Bath chair unmolested along the sea front.
“Oh, yes, we're wonderfully safe here,’ said Miss Challoner, shooing her fox terrier off a completed Balaclava. ‘If you come to think of it, there’s nothing near that could possibly interest the Germans — not an aerodrome or a camp or anything.’
The ladies thought of it, and agreed with Miss Challoner that Crumpington did seem to be especially blessed. That night, as she was putting her mistress to bed, Sparks suggested that Miss Ewing might write to the London caretaker and arrange for the most valuable china and silver to be removed to the bank.
‘I don’t care what happens to it,’ said Miss Ewing. ‘I don’t care if I never see it again. Probably I shan’t go back to London when the war is over.’
‘Oh now, Madam, you'd think very different if it was the season starting, and all your friends there, and the opera coming on and all,’ Sparks said, tucking in the eiderdown.
‘No, I shall never go back,’ said Miss Ewing, thinking with a shudder of those dreadfully ‘upsetting’ last days, of the sirens sounding, of people running in the square, their gas masks thumping against their backs. When Sparks thought of London, she saw Miss Ewing in her sables setting off for Covent Garden. When Miss Ewing thought of London, she saw herself lying dead in the wreckage of her father’s Chippendale dining suite, the dust drifting down on her upturned face.
“Mrs. Prentiss’s son says that we're so safe here,’ she said.
‘Yes, we’re in the best place, no doubt, Madam,’ said Sparks. “Though it doesn’t seem that there’s going to be any real war, not what you might call war, does it?’
Feeling pleasantly drowsy, Miss Ewing murmured, ‘Miss Challoner thinks there’s bound to be a revolution in Germany soon. She’s always so well-informed. Pull the curtains right back when you've put the light out, Sparks. I like to hear the sea.
It was a shock when, only a day or two later, things began to happen. One morning, before the old ladies had got their teeth in or their curled fronts adjusted or their stays laced for the day, the terrible noise started. The China tea slopped over in the trembling saucer as Miss Ewing listened, the windows in the Palm Court shivered as though gripped by an ague. At lunchtime nobody could eat, everyone was listening for the next heart-stopping rumble of gunfire. That night there were several muffled explosions that the headwaiter, not so attentive over the wine list as usual, thought might be depth charges out in the Channel.
Later, Sparks, peeping cautiously through the bedroom curtains, reported big flashes from the sea. ‘It’s a raid going on over there, I should say, Madam,’ she said. She looked mysteriously flushed and exhilarated, something like an elderly vivandiére as she clutched the bottle of brandy that Miss Ewing always had, in case of emergencies, beside her bed.
‘Put down the brandy and go to bed,’ Miss Ewing commanded her sharply.
Miss Ewing had a shocking night and came down next morning, grey-faced, to find that one or two of the more nervous hotel guests had already left. The gunfire rumbled away across the Channel all that week, sometimes louder, sometimes softer. A picture fell off the wall in Miss Challoner’s room, narrowly missing the fox terrier, and Mrs. Prentiss’s son wrote that it might be as well if his mother tried a change, say to Torquay, for a bit. After she had gone the rout set in. The lift made innumerable wheezing journeys up and down, packed with suitcases. Hired Daimlers stood at the door, and the old ladies stepped in, followed by maids with rugs and jewel cases, and sped away, part of the tragic pattern of speeding cars, trudging people, laden farm carts, that was spreading out over the face of Europe. Miss Ewing went, too, having wired to a married nephew who lived in the depths of the country, far removed from the coast, to expect her and Sparks for a visit.
Miss Ewing arrived at her nephew’s old house and was comforted because it was set so deeply in leafy lanes. For the first few days she did nothing but sit about listening to the silence, drinking it in greedily, as though it were a precious draught of spring water. Planes passed overhead a good deal, but she was quickly able to distinguish the red, white, and blue circles, and after a bit they gave her a comfortable feeling of security, like the sight of a policeman going the rounds at night. With a little imagination, it would almost have been possible to forget the war completely. Of course, there was the wireless, but she avoided listening to it as much as possible. Her nephew and his wife listened at all hours; their eldest boy had got his commission in October. Miss Ewing sat out in the garden and knitted him a Balaclava. Her appetite was marvellous. During those terrible last days at Crumpington she had been unable to eat anything, but now she ate an excellent dinner, slept like a top, and woke up looking forward to the weighty breakfast tray with which Sparks staggered upstairs every morning.
“We're so safe here, Sparks. We ought to be very grateful,’ she said, pouring out her coffee and just glancing quickly at the headlines of the nice little picture paper, which made everything sound so much better than The Times did. Sparks, who hankered after the fleshpots of Crumpington, agreed somewhat sourly.
One night, a week or so after Miss Ewing’s arrival, her nephew and his wife discussed in low tones the possibility of Aunt Mildred’s leaving, and decided hopelessly that she was there for the duration. Fate, however, arranged otherwise. A couple of nights later a lone German bomber, making off ina hurry after an unsuccessful search for the flying field from which Miss Ewing’s friendly red, white, and blue planes came, unloaded his bombs over some woods only a mile or so from the house. The noise of the explosions, followed by the sound of fire engines dashing by, the local gentlemen in wardens’ tin hats rushing about, the sight of Sparks shivering in the gas mask which she had donned at the first explosion all put Miss Ewing in a state of prostration which even the brandy couldn’t help much. Next day a man was putting new glass in the damaged windows as Miss Ewing came downstairs, gloved and toqued, followed by Sparks, white-faced from night alarums and morning packing. While they waited for the hired car, Miss Ewing’s nephew asked where she was going. The wings on her toque quivered agitatedly as she cried, ‘Anywhere! Anywhere to be quiet, to be safe!’ Less vaguely, she said that she was heading for a secluded hotel, high on a Welsh mountain; what seemed like a systematic German persecution could hardly follow her there.
“You'll be just in time to get a good view of the invasion from Ireland, Aunt Mildred,’ her nephew said with a touch of malice.
Tugging at a doeskin glove so violently that it split at the seam, she stared at him and groaned, ‘Do they really think it will come that way?”
‘It’s been suggested,’ he said.
“Then where — where can one count on being safe?’ cried Miss Ewing, reaching for her bag as though she had a vague idea that it might contain the note, the coin, with which to purchase this urgent necessity.
‘Nowhere,’ he said sombrely.
At that moment the car appeared and Miss Ewing, getting in, sped away once more with her maid, her jewel case, her travelling rugs — the sad little caravan which was all that remained of her treasure on earth. If necessary for her safety, she would jettison even those remnants as ruthlessly as the German pilot had jettisoned his bombs. To be safe, that was all that mattered — to die in her own time and her own bed and not be splattered with anonymous violence over some stranger's field. ‘It’s such a quiet hotel, right up on that mountain,’ she said to the silent Sparks. ‘Nothing like the San Remo, of course, but it’s well out of the way of things. There's nothing round there that could possibly attract — you know what.’ After a pause she added loudly, defiantly, as though someone had spoken, ‘Nothing!’ and dabbed her handkerchief against her unsteady lips.