AS THE FRUITFUL VINE
31 August 1940
Lucy Grant had to admit that none of the big moments of her life had really come up to expectations. Something had always missed fire somewhere. When she thought back to all the memorable occasions of her twenty-five years, they greeted her with the identical damp, depressing fizzle of squibs which hadn't performed quite according to schedule. Her childhood was littered with these disappointments, her adolescence offered example after example of the budding and wilting of bright hopes. There had been the time, for instance, of her graduation from Oxford with honours, a proud moment entirely overshadowed by her elder sister’s engagement to a more than satisfactory suitor. It was amazing how often Valerie had been responsible for the damping and wilting process. Of course, it couldn't be said that she had anything to do with directing the limelight away from Lucy at Lucy’s own wedding. That was the fault of the war, which made it necessary for her and Philip Grant to get married quietly during one of his hurried leaves, without any of the trimmings of gold braid, crossed swords, fluttering brides- maids, and admiring friends to which she had looked forward. Although naturally she was blissfully happy, she couldn’t help being a little regretful.
After a few days’ honeymoon, Philip had to rejoin his ship, and it was with the greatest astonishment that Lucy discovered in due course that she was going to have a baby. It seemed less like a marital than a botanical incident, the result of a chance brush between a bee and a flower. This discovery of motherhood ought to have been stirring, but again a big moment didn’t quite come off. Paternity would catch up with Philip somewhere in the West Indies or the Mediterranean or wherever Lucy’s startled letter reached him; his reply would reach her long after any emotions which she might have been feeling at the moment of writing his letter had passed. To be truthful, those emotions were not overpowering. It was difficult to work up emotion over a tender secret which had to be shouted to a bee who was now winging his way God knows where. Once more, Lucy felt, life had treated her cruelly.
The way in which her family received the news was also as she might have expected. Her parents, instead of raising an excited to-do about the first grandchild, did not try to hide the fact that they considered 1940 an inauspicious year for babies. ‘You might,’ said her mother reproachfully, ‘have waited.’ Lucy had imagined her weeping a little and immediately setting to work on something complicated in fuzzy pink Angora, but both these impulses were out of date in aworld where the bombs were already dropping fast. In her mother’s day a pregnant woman spent a good deal of time on a sofa, thinking beautiful thoughts and resolutely avoiding unpleasant ones; people took care not to speak of anything shocking or violent in front of her. Nowadays shocking things turned up on the doorstep with the morning paper; violence was likely to crash out of a summer sky on a woman who could move only slowly and who was not as spry as usual at throwing herself on her face in the gutter. Belatedly, Lucy’s mother explained, ‘Of course, I’m glad, darling. It’s only that I wish you'd chosen a happier time — you and Philip.’ The anxious lines settling deeper round her eyes, she said, ‘I’m sure Philip would want you to be very careful, Lucy dear. Don’t bother to read too many papers, and don’t listen to that horrible wireless more than you need. All you've got to think about from now on is keeping well and cheerful and having a healthy, beautiful baby.’ It seemed only a step from there to a few cosy tears and a chat about pink Angora, but her courageous Coué broke down miserably. ‘Daddy and I think that you’d better move out of that flat,’ she said. ‘It’s got no air-raid shelter at all.’ Her worried eyes told Lucy that she didn’t really believe all that smooth stuff about having a healthy, beautiful baby. She believed only in terror and a grandson who would always be slightly queer because he was born, as people would whisper significantly, during one of the worst air bombardments of the war.
Lucy found that her friends reacted to the news in the same way. Women’s eyes had a habit of sliding past her with a clairvoyant look; in that brief, unguarded second between smiles her friends listened only too plainly to ghostly bombs crashing. Although she was feeling remarkably well, their manner assumed that she was a stretcher case already. She had hoped to have fun discussing layettes and possible names, but so far as she could see, the spectacle of an expectant young mother with a gas mask thumping against her ribs turned the thoughts of observers to deep shelters rather than to organdie. Aunts who had always been fonder of Valerie now kissed Lucy with mournful affection and asked her to stay with them in the country. ‘London at this time of year is so hot and dusty,’ they put it delicately. Lucy began to feel like a housemaid who had gone wrong and was being treated with inflexible kindness by some charitable organisation. After she gave up the flat and moved home, to please her mother, there was a conspiracy to keep any news of naval losses from her, since the clairvoyant friends knew that something was bound to happen to Philip. She arrived home one afternoon to find her mother, white and tremulous, hovering over a telegram which turned out to be from a cousin who was coming up from Devonshire for the sales and wanted Lucy to meet her at a matinée. Holding the telegram, Lucy looked apologetically at her mother, who was pretending, with a touch of hysteria, that of course she had guessed it was from Monica all the time. Monica’s mother was one of the aunts who had suggested that Lucy should come down and stay for a bit. ‘Now, why don’t you go back with Monica?’ Lucy’s mother said, looking at her eagerly. ‘The change would do you good, darling.’
‘I might,’ Lucy said.
Perhaps it would be a relief to get out of London, the city in which she seemed to be the only pregnant woman. Although it was too early for any change to show in her figure, she was morbidly certain that people in the street stared at her with pity and curiosity; the manner of the shopgirl who sold her some little vests yesterday had been surely over-solicitous. At a time in her life when she might reasonably expect to feel proud and happy, she felt merely sheepish. It really was too bad.
Valerie turned up next day, looking cool and trim in her nurse’s uniform. She and Bernard had given their country house to be used as a convalescent home for officers; photographs of Valerie, sitting efficiently at her desk or smiling efficiently at a convalescent major lying wrapped in rugs on the terrace, had appeared in one or two of the weeklies. Valerie had always been efficient as far back as Lucy could remember. The war was going well for her, like everything else. Bernard had an important job which kept him in London.
‘For heaven's sake,’ she said to Lucy, ‘do go to Aunt Kitty's and stop us all having miscarriages for you every time the siren goes.’
“But it’s such nonsense,’ said Lucy feebly. ‘I’m strong as a horse. I've never felt better.’
Valerie looked at her. ‘I'll admit this business of having a baby suits you,’ she said. ‘You're positively blooming.”
‘There was something strangely grudging in her expression which made Lucy glance at her with sudden attention, and the conventional words somehow didn’t sound quite right. For a moment Lucy sat perfectly still, then she asked, softly and carelessly, ‘Why haven't you and Bernard ever tried it, Val? I’ve often wondered.”
Valerie got up and took a cigarette from the box on the table. She was rather a time lighting it and finding a place to put the match. ‘Well, I don’t know,’ she said. ‘I suppose we wanted a few years first. Then the war came, and it didn’t seem a good time.’ When she turned round there was nothing in her face but the familiar derisive amusement. ‘You know, only rash creatures like you and Philip would think of starting a family right slap in the middle of Armageddon.’
‘Yes, only fools like Phil and me,’ said Lucy placidly.
‘I've got to get that train,’ said Valerie. ‘Don’t get up.’
‘I believe I'll go to Aunt Kitty’s after all,’ said Lucy suddenly. ‘Phil wouldn't want me to take risks.’
When the front door banged, Lucy went to the window and watched her sister walk down the street looking for a taxi. Valerie had got thinner, Lucy noticed; it wasn’t difficult to guess the type of lean, rangy Englishwoman she would be in her middle years. Neither had it been difficult to guess, a few minutes back, that she and Bernard had wanted a child ever since their marriage but that no sort of miracle would give them one. Clairvoyance wasn’t the prerogative of the kindly women who glanced briefly at Lucy’s waistline and then away. Lucy thought that she might go out, too; there was some shopping she wanted to do. When she went to put on her hat, she looked at herself for a moment in the long mirror. She was wearing a print dress with a soft, gathered bosom, and it struck her that for the first time the lines of her slim figure showed signs of what was happening to her. She surveyed herself from all angles with a sleepy, satisfied smile. As Valerie got thinner, she herself would probably get plumper and prettier, for of course she and Philip would have more babies.
When she boarded a bus at the corner, it was something in her face rather than her figure which made the conductor say, ‘Careful now, Ma’am,’ and steady her with a hand under the elbow. She moved delicately up the crowded bus and sat down. Newspaper posters strung some tale of horror along the railings, but she looked at them vaguely, thinking that she had better buy some new sweaters for the long, dreaming autumn at Aunt Kitty’s.
 