LUNCH WITH MR. BIDDLE 7 December 1940
Women of all ages liked Winthrop Biddle — ‘He’s a great dear’ was the expression they generally used — and he was devoted to the whole sex in the cosy way of an uncle who enjoys the confidence of a vast number of totally unrelated nieces. His feminine friends knew that he could be relied upon to provide a lunch, a bed, sound advice, or a cast-iron alibi as required, and not to go in for jolly avuncular pouncings in taxis. Never a pouncer even in his youth, in this mellow later phase he was really a perfect example of an elderly English bachelor. Since men liked him, too, his circle of friends and acquaintances was immense. The drawing-room of his small, neat house in Devonshire, where he lived with a devoted housekeeper, was crammed with photographs of charming women and distinguished men inscribed affectionately to their dear old friend Winnie. If they were not actually distinguished themselves, they were sure to be closely related to someone whowas; Mr. Biddle had a harmless weakness for people with labels attached.
Before the war he had been an adept at finding unspoilt little places on the Riviera where one could live for a song and where one or another of his women friends —- Mme. Delacroix, who used, you know, to be one of the Derbyshire Melton-Bagburys, or little Mrs. Maverick, whose mother had been, you remember, a famous Edwardian beauty in her day — had a large and hospitable villa. Now that the war had put an end to these excursions, there was nothing for it but to stay at home and sink gracefully, as he himself put it, with his loud, jolly laugh, into a peaceful, gardening old age.
Mr. Biddle’s ideas of peace differed considerably, however, from most people’s. The spare room at Four Winds was generally occupied by one of a procession of nieces, and Mr. Biddle spent a good deal of time on the telephone inviting his choicer neighbours to little lunch parties or little musical evenings, stiffened, of course, with imported celebrities or near-celebrities from London. ‘I do want you to come!’ he would shout. ‘Effie Trumpington is coming. . . . Of course you know Effie Trumpington. She may not be able to sing for us. You know about her trouble, of course, poor dear.’ Satisfied by a polite murmur at the other end of the wire, he would go on to say that he particularly wanted the murmurer’s presence at the party because they were going to try out a rather pleasant Alsace wine he had discovered for a song. (Mr. Biddle always arranged some sort of little novelty — a wine or an amusing table decoration or a Provengal way of cooking chicken that his housekeeper really didn’t boggle too badly, considering that she had to leave out the truffles and the butter.) ‘And I know,’ Mr. Biddle would continue, ‘what a judge you are. Now, I hope you can manage it, my dear fellow. It’s such a joy to see people in these dreadful days when one never knows what may happen next. Did you hear the bombs in the night? I suppose they were after the camp again. I was out half the night — so tiresome! Well, eight o'clock, then. I do trust that I shan’t be called out in the middle of dinner by these fearful, inconsiderate bounders.’
The work of an air-raid warden was Mr. Biddle’s war effort, and the affectionate adopted nieces thought it really awfully sporting of the dear old thing, clapping a tin hat on his bald head and cycling round the neighbourhood blowing a whistle at all hours. Since Four Winds was surrounded by several juicy military objectives, he was kept pretty busy.
One night an inconsiderate bounder jettisoned a couple of bombs in a field at the bottom of Mr. Biddle’s garden, breaking one or two windows of the house and joggling a charming little sketch of St. Tropez off the wall in the dining-room. Mr. Biddle was as ruddy and smiling as ever when describing the incident to his assembled lunch party next day. ‘You shall have a peep at the craters after lunch if you're good,’ he said to Dora Cunningham, who was there not because she was related to anyone especially distinguished but on the strength of her looks. Mr. Biddle flashed his spectacles and his false teeth at her like an amiable cannibal. ‘It makes, I think, rather a nice little contrast,’ he said. ‘The onslaughts of barbarism in the night, the pleasures of civilisation and beauty today. You're in great good looks, Dora, dear child.’ He turned to another guest. “Tell me what you think of the Amontillado, General. I got it for a song through Bobbie Thrupp — you know, Thrupp & Cantelupe, the wine merchants in St. James's Street. I know, of course, what a judge you are.’
The lunch party promised to be wholly successful, Mr. Biddle thought happily. Dora Cunningham, decoratively displaying her legs on the sofa, represented the fair; the brave and the brainy were not forgotten. General Sysonby, looking judicious over the Amontillado, represented the one, and the other was present in the person of Ursula Farmer, a woman novelist who had been bombed out of Hampstead and was now smouldering creatively in a cottage on the common, whence Mr. Biddle had triumphantly unearthed her. The party was completed by Mrs. Sysonby and a Mr. Potts, who was unremarkable in himself but whose aunt had travelled extensively in Tibet. Mr. Biddle, as he went round with the sherry, managed to murmur to General Sysonby, ‘You've probably read Ursula Farmer’s Give Us This Day. Unpleasant stuff but brilliant. No doubt about that.’ Leaving the General looking somewhat alarmed, he sketched details rapidly to Miss Farmer. ‘Sysonby of the Punjab — magnificent soldier. Grows the best roses of anyone round here.’ Dora Cunningham’s legs, being self-evident, required no explanation.
Lunch was announced by Mr. Biddle’s gardener, who on these occasions was summoned from the herbaceous border and crammed into a black coat. The presence of this heavily breathing servitor gave to the entertainment a native flavour which Mr. Biddle considered every bit as original as the Provengal dishes.
It was not until halfway through the meal that Mr. Biddle realised with dismay that things were not going well. He quickly traced the trouble. Dora, whose business it was to look delectable and keep her mouth shut, had been inspired by the Amontillado or the devil to chip in on Miss Farmer's interesting discussion with General Sysonby about the possibility of invasion. Miss Farmer, who was there to utter, and not to bother about looking delectable, was doing the one all right but was also trying to do the other with an occasional meaningful smile at the General which implied that they must pause for a minute to let the child prattle. The child was beginning to look peevish and unbecomingly flushed.
Mr. Biddle, breathing love and amity, rushed to the rescue by drawing everyone’s attention to the centrepiece of flowers; which he had made himself out of bits of shell, cork, and glue. ‘It’s work that your clever little fingers could do, I know, Dora,’ he said, but only Mrs. Sysonby really took an interest. When Mr. Biddle succeeded in disengaging himself from Mrs. Sysonby and was able again to lend an anxious ear to the conversation at the other end of the table, he found that Miss Farmer had led it into deep waters in the hope of shaking off Dora, who, however, had plunged valiantly after her, to the total neglect of Mr. Potts. The General, caught like Paris between Athene and Aphrodite, was twirling his wineglass in glum silence. It seemed possible that the ladies, leaning their panting bosoms nearer, would shortly be growling over him in open conflict on the mat. Really, thought Mr. Biddle despairingly, it was naughty of Dora. No one was performing, and the gardener was being maddeningly slow in handing the crépes flambées, which, Mr. Biddle’s nose told him, were burnt.
Happily, Mrs. Sysonby made a diversion by remarking on the Basque table mats, which Mr. Biddle had bought at Biarritz. “They make me feel I’m in France,’ she said. ‘Oh, those winters on the Riviera, Mr. Biddle! When will they ever come again?’
Before Mr. Biddle could answer, Dora had observed that she, for one, didn't care if they never did. ‘I wouldn't set foot in that beastly country if you paid me,’ she said. ‘Of course, you may have some special reason for feeling like that,’ said Miss Farmer, smiling at the General and making it sound as though she suspected Dora of having been betrayed by a poilu on a day trip to Boulogne. She went on to say that it was difficult to see how anyone of intelligence — here she paused for a second, which seemed to unhappy Mr. Biddle cruelly interminable — could blame the many for the crimes of the few. Anyone who really knew France and the French, that is. It turned out that Miss Farmer knew France and the French better than they did themselves. Mr. Biddle, miserably chewing cold crépes flambées, had a confused impression that she mentioned a French maternal grandmother, which was awkward, as Dora had just registered her opinion that the French were a low, immoral people whom it was impossible to trust. Clearing his throat, the General began carefully, ‘I daresay, when the history fellas come to weigh things up, there will be found to be faults on —’ but Dora brushed him aside with a fierce ‘I thought that Dunkirk settled it for most people. I had a brother there.’
It seemed that the affair was going to develop into a personal scrap between Dora’s brother and Miss Farmer’s grandmother. Mr. Biddle noted with alarm that his two embattled guests were rapidly purpling. Something, he felt, should have warned him —some lack of the essential feminine perfume in Miss Farmer’s makeup, some waspishness hidden beneath Dora’s delicious exterior — that the mixture was chemically impossible. Casting round desperately for a topic that would offend no one, he remembered Mr. Pott’s foot- loose aunt and asked if she had written anything new about Tibet. Mr. Potts was reluctantly transferring his mesmerized attention from the battle of the goddesses to Mr. Biddle when a new voice spoke louder than any at the lunch table.
Never before had Mr. Biddle heard the air-raid siren with sensations of relief and delight. Jumping to his feet, he cried, ‘Such a nuisance, but I'll have to go off! Don’t disturb yourselves, any of you dear people. Carter is just going to bring coffee.’ On his way to the bicycle shed, he put his head in at the dining-room window and called, ‘If things get at all noisy, Sysonby, take the ladies under the stairs!’
Bicycling down the drive, settling his tin hat more firmly with one hand, Mr. Biddle had a pleasing vision of Dora and Miss Farmer sitting together under the stairs among his bottles of Amontillado. Since there was nothing like a diversion of this nature for getting people acquainted, the dear ladies would probably emerge cobwebby but the best of friends. The tottering balance of the lunch party had been saved in the nick of time. Really, thought Mr. Biddle happily, he couldn't be more grateful to the siren, which he pictured as yet another niece, even more toothsome than little Dora, sitting on a rock and moaning to oblige old Uncle Winnie. He could hear the inconsiderate bounders zooming faintly somewhere in the pale-blue sky, and presently the explosion of several bombs. Dora and Miss Farmer would certainly be under the stairs by now, probably holding hands. Spinning along the road, Mr. Biddle put his whistle in his mouth and blew a long, triumphant blast.