BATTLE OF THE GREEKS 8 March 1941
The Red Cross sewing party met twice a week in Mrs. Ramsay's dining-room to stitch pyjamas, drink a dish of tea, and talk about their menfolk. Mrs. Ramsay found pretty soon that she was in possession of all sorts of unsuspected facts about the husbands of the village — Mrs. Peters’ husband, for instance, who was the head groom up at the big house. Mrs. Ramsay felt that she would never be able to look at his neat, gaitered legs and fox-terrier face again without remembering that he had cold feet in bed. ‘Ow, terrible!’ Mrs. Peters had sighed, rounding off a buttonhole. ‘I always say to him, “Daddy,” I say, “one might as well put one’s feet up against a frog.” It was also interesting to discover that Mr. Lovelace, from Tuppers Farm, had swallowed his auntie’s thimble as a child and that Mr. Garner, the big house’s second gardener, was always attacked by bees on account of his upstanding hair. Mrs. Ramsay, sitting listening in a white overall so crackling that it hurt, felt she ought to produce some fascinating anecdote about Mr. Ramsay, but could think of none that would bear relating.
There was a day, however, when the conversation took a more international turn. It was impelled that way by Mrs. Ramsay's suggestion that the next parcel of comforts might possibly be sent to the Greeks, on whose behalf the wife of the Greek Minister was appealing.
‘The Greeks!’ said Mrs. Peters suspiciously. ‘Ow, what an original idea!’ She held up the pair of trousers she was making and regarded them with a frown, as though meditating what it would be like to put one’s feet up against a Greek.
The rest of the sewing party looked dubiously at Mrs. Ramsay. The idea of swathing Grecian torsos in good English winceyette was obviously difficult to digest right away. Mrs. Twistle coughed gently. Everything about Mrs. Twistle, who had been in service with a ducal family as a girl, was gentle, even her way of uttering sentiments that would have set the strawberry leaves shuddering with the cold breath of revolution. Mrs. Ramsay could never repress a start when, in a voice soft as a dove’s, Mrs. Twistle would murmur, “There are heads in high places, Madam, as should be rolling on Tower Hill’ or ‘If I had my way, there are plenty of gentlemen in the present government who I would like - excuse me, Madam - to take out and shoot against a wall.’ Having gently coughed, Mrs. Twistle whispered, ‘I suppose, Madam, that the Greek gentlemen would be wearing pyjamas? In the photographs they're always in little, short sort of petticoat affairs.’
‘Oh dear, Mrs. Twistle! It would be terrible if we sent our lovely pyjamas and then they didn’t wear them!’ Mrs. Lovelace cried, plucking her glasses off her nose in her agitation.
“Ow, not in bed! They wouldn't wear their petticoats in bed!’ Mrs. Peters exclaimed robustly, provoking a choking explosion of giggles from Miss Lovelace, the only virgin present in the austere company of matrons.
‘Hem this sleeve, Elsie,’ said her mother, and the virgin subsided, her face crimson.
Everyone now appealed to Mrs. Ramsay, as the most worldly member of the party, to settle the question of Greek male slumber wear. ‘Hark at us all arguing when Mrs. Ramsay can tell us!’ cried Mrs. Garner. The table turned its collective gaze upon her, as though confident that she had bedded with half the heroes in The Iliad. Mrs. Ramsay thought distractedly of the only Greek in her life, a stout London restaurant proprietor who had stood grilling skewered lamb and garlic over charcoal, wearing neither petticoats nor pyjamas but a stained serge suit. The memory didn’t seem really helpful. Happily, she recollected that the Greek Minister's wife had specifically asked for pyjamas, and the party relaxed, breathing heavily.
‘Greeks!’ said Mrs. Peters. ‘Well, wait until I tell Daddy! He'll have a good laugh at me stitching away for the Greeks. Kind of little men, aren’t they?’ She held up the trousers again. ‘I suppose these are going to fit them?’
The garments in question looked to Mrs. Ramsay as though they would accommodate not only a Greek but a couple of Albanians too, but she uttered soothing words.
‘Well, poor fellows, it must be bitterly cold up on those mountains,’ said Mrs. Lovelace. ‘It’s sort of nice to think that our pyjamas are going to keep them warm. And when you think how splendid they're being, chasing off that nasty Mussolini — Mrs Twistle coughed gently again and remarked with implacable softness that the Greeks were very marvellous, no doubt, but in her opinion it was a pity that England had to have foreign allies monkeying about with her war.
‘Ow well, I’m not all that narrow-minded,’ said Mrs. Peters. ‘After all, if you have allies, they’ve got to be foreign. Stands to reason. And as Daddy says, it’s not the poor things’ fault that they can’t speak the King’s English proper. We should look nice fools, Mrs. Twistle, parleyvooing in Athens, no doubt. May I trouble you for the box of pins, Mrs. Garner? I thank you.”
Mrs. Twistle’s pink cheeks went two shades pinker and her Alexandra coiffure was tremulous with emotion. Her voice, however, remained mild as ever as she whispered that she had nothing against the Greeks, mind you — nothing whatever. “There’s no doubt, Mrs. Peters, that they’re a fine lot of men. It’s only that if | had my way, we’d have nothing to do with foreigners. We're better off without them, though there are those in high places, I’m well aware, as don’t see eye to eye.”
‘Ow, and how about the Americans?’ Mrs. Peters asked sarcastically. ‘I suppose you're going to tell me that if they wanted to come over and help us, you wouldn’t let them, on account of them being, as you might say, foreigners.’
‘I would not,’ replied Mrs. Twistle.
At this interesting juncture, Mrs. Dogberry, who was deaf, shouted out, ‘Ready for buttons!’ Half a dozen hands reached out cards of buttons to her, and the party settled back again to listen to Mrs. Peters and Mrs. Twistle.
‘I'm sure I don’t want to contradict you, Mrs. Twistle,’ said Mrs. Peters, ‘but I must say I think you're wrong. Daddy says that if the Americans came over and fought, we'd have the Nasties beaten before the end of the year.’
‘How lovely that would be,’ Mrs. Ramsay murmured, hoping to make a diversion.
Mrs. Twistle refused to be side-tracked. ‘In my opinion, Mrs. Peters,’ she said with ominous calm, ‘we should have been better off without the Americans in the last war, if it comes to that.’
‘Ow, now, really, Mrs. Twistle!’ Mrs. Peters laughed in a superior way. ‘Everyone knows that if they hadn’t come in when they did, we should have lost the war. And they was a splendid lot of young men. Daddy says —’
“With all due respect to Mr. Peters,’ said Mrs. chilling stateliness — Mrs. Ramsay, shuddering slightly, could imagine her using the same tone to announce ‘Your Grace, the tumbril waits’ - ‘with ail due respect, splendid no doubt they was, but uncommon late they was also. By the time they arrived, our boys had done all the work, Mrs. Peters, and there was nothing for them to do. Mr. Twistle always says the same.”
‘Ow, there was nothing for them to do, wasn’t there?’ Mrs. Peters said. ‘What about the battles they was in? What about the American war memorial? I suppose they put that up just in memory of the trip across the Atlantic, Mrs. Twistle? Daddy could tell you a very different story. He was right beside the American boys in France, and he says they fought like hellcats, Mrs. Twistle. If you don’t mind my saying so, I think Daddy might be allowed to know better than Mr. Twistle, who wasn’t never there. Like hellcats, he said, and you can put that in your pipe and smoke it, Mrs. Twistle. Ow, yes!’
There was now, Mrs. Ramsay observed, not a heave to choose between the Twistle and Peters bosoms. High drama was in the air. Needles were still while the shivering Greeks waited. Miss Lovelace, whose risible faculties seemed equally moved by the Muses of Comedy and Tragedy, gave a sudden wild giggle and was sharply told by her mother to hem a sleeve.
‘Pardon me, Mrs. Peters, but my ‘usband was there,’ Mrs. Twistle said, mislaying, in her agitation, one of the refined ‘h’s acquired in the ducal household. ‘My ’usband was in France from 1915 to 1918.’
‘Ow, but behind the lines, Mrs. Twistle, behind the lines,’ said Mrs. Peters. ‘Daddy was in the lines all the time.’
Mrs. Ramsay was waiting apprehensively for Mrs. Twistle’s reply to this crushing statement when Mrs. Dogberry suddenly came to the rescue. Having been quietly sewing, blissfully unconscious of the high-voltage currents crackling round her head, she shouted across the table, ‘How are chickens laying, Mrs. Twistle? Mine are right off — all the mucky stuff they put in the chicken food nowadays, likely.’
There was a pause, then Mrs. Twistle replied with dignity, ‘Thank you, Mrs. Dogberry, but I can’t complain. My little pullets are giving me my steady five.’
The crisis was over. Mrs. Ramsay breathed again. Stirring from its drugged trance, the table began to babble of hot mashes and crop-bound hens. A few minutes later, Mrs. Ramsay was electrified to hear Mrs. Peters say magnanimously, ‘I passed by your place the other afternoon, Mrs. Twistle, and I thought those Light Sussex birds of yours were looking real lovely.’
‘They’re nice,’ Mrs. Twistle admitted, ‘but they don’t give the brown eggs like your Rhode Island Reds do, Mrs. Peters.’
When the compliments had died down, Mrs. Ramsay asked cautiously, ‘Then it’s agreed? We'll send the next lot of pyjamas to the Greeks?’
‘Ow, yes, send them to the Greeks by all means,’ said Mrs. Peters. ‘It'll be a nice change for them to get their limbs into something cosy after those little skirts, poor lads.’
‘I think it would be ever so nice, Madam,’ said Mrs. Twistle softly. ‘After all, they’re doing very wonderfully, aren’t they? If those in high places don’t see that we help them as much as possible, there’s heads as will certainly roll when the voice of the people is heard. May I trouble you for the loan of your scissors, Mrs. Peters?”
‘Help yourself, Mrs. Twistle,’ said Mrs. Peters.