‘Let's get hold of everyone. I want to talk. God, how I want to talk!’
‘Didn't you know? She's taken the children to New York’ ‘Aren't they in Cornwall?’ ‘Of course, it was a bad blitz last night.’ 
‘Now I know what was wrong with my leave,’ “Walter wasn’t there to talk to. I'd have liked to talk to Walter.’
“You won't be bored, because all the other wives are down here too,’ 
‘I'm longing to meet them,’
‘Oh, that pattern!’ ‘I’ve just done it for Jim. You'll find ita bit of a beast when you come to the neck.’ ‘One of them must be very near the Bradys’ place,’
“Mr. Brady?’ ‘Ah, he’s gone now. In the Air Force, so they tell me.’
“Yes, the last I heard, he was in Egypt,’
‘Remember that last weekend?’ ‘Linda and Jimmy were there. We were all sun-bathing on the terrace and Jimmy was painting Miriam. Remember? It must have been the August just before the war.’
“We might go and look at the house on our way,’ ‘I wonder if it’s been bought yet. I forgot to ask.”
‘No reasonable offer refused’.
‘Let’s take a walk round now,’ “We can go and ask about the rooms afterwards. It’s probably those cottages just across the way.”
‘Poor old Walter,’
‘It looks funny without the Dufy on that wall,’
‘It looks funniest of all without Walter,’ 
‘We're having a three-day exercise over this area next week,’ ‘Tanks and the whole works. It’s grand country for tanks.’
‘It must be, darling,’
‘If you're wanting the key, the agent at Sarumcester has it,’
“We don’t want the key,’ ‘We were just having a look around.’
‘The man wiped his face with the back of his hand and nodded cheerfully. He looked Don up and down. ‘Ah, it’s not the sort of place you'd like, sir,’ ‘There’s many as stops to look, out of curiosity, you might say, but they never wants the key. Who'd be wanting an outlandish place as that is? A regular landmark it is to the bombers, shouldn't wonder, standing out on the hilltop so white and flashing. See it miles off, young fellow in the Air Force tells my son.’
‘It could be camouflaged,’
‘Ah, it could be,’ ‘But then, think of the blackout, sir! That's what a gentleman who comes to look at it says to me. “Think of all that glass and the blackout,” he says. Oh no, it wouldn't do for you and the lady, sir. A funny bunch used to be there — a Mr. Brady and his friends down from London. Yes, a regular funny bunch.’ He looked at Don again, friendly and respectful, his blue eyes smiling as they glanced over the spick-and-span uniform. “They weren't your sort at all, sir. Notat all.’
‘As a matter of fact, we're not house-hunting at all. We're trying to find a billet for my wife. Perhaps you can tell us where Mrs. Coombes lives?’