“Talking of old houses,’ ‘reminds me of the old place I was in the first time I ever went out to service, before I was with Her Grace. Oh, it was quaint! Everything was just as it used to be, and the gentleman wouldn't have it modernised on no account. Stella Place was the name of it, over the other side of Foxley Green.’
‘Stella Place!’ ‘Ow, what a name! Whatever will they think up next? Why not Elsie Place or Maud Place while they’re about it?”
“Well, it was on account of its history, Mrs. Peters,’ ‘Ever so many years ago a gentleman called Dean Swift murdered a young lady called Stella there.’
‘Murdered,’ ‘How dreadful! If I'd been you, Mrs. Twistle, I shouldn't have been able to sleep a wink in the nasty place.’
‘Us girls, being young and silly, used to fancy that we heard something when we came back late from our half-days out,’ ‘Maybe it was the Dean come back, and maybe it wasn’t. Anyway, there was the pore lady’s blood under the rug on the parlour floor. The parlourmaid let me have a peep one day. They'd tried and tried to get the stains out, she said, but nothing would move them.’
“Uman blood,’ ‘Nothing will move it. 'Ave you ever been to Stone’enge, Mrs. Twistle? Fred and me went there on a charabang trip one Easter Monday. There’s ’uman bloodstains on some of those enormous great stones, so they say, left there by the Druids, and you can’t budge them.’ 
‘Ow, Druids!’ ‘All I can say is give m nty minutes at Stonehenge with a good, stiffbrush and Vim, and I'd get the place so you wouldn't object to eating your dinner off it.’
‘No doubt you would, Mrs. Peters,’ ‘But the fact remains that I saw the marks with my own eyes, as distinct as they was, no doubt, on the day when the pore soul was struck down.’
‘What made Dean bash her, Mrs. Twistle?”
‘Some say one thing and some another, Mrs. Dogberry.’
‘What a shocking thing!’ ‘I've heard of Dean Swift, now you mention it. A writer, wasn’t he?”
‘Ow, writers!’ 
‘I believe that he wrote the lady letters,’ ‘Beautiful letters, hundreds and hundreds of them. I fancy they was printed in a book. It does seem sad that after all that the gentleman should have yielded to such a horrid impulse.’
‘Ow, well, perhaps the pore man got tired of waiting for an answer,’ ‘I remember Daddy used to get wild with me’ — the party understood that she was referring to Mr. Peters and not to her paternal ancestor — ‘when I was away in service before we were married and he didn’t have his weekly letter. I suppose he used to wonder if I wasn’t larking with some other boy. Pore Daddy.’
‘I think you must be confusing Dean Swift with someone else, aren’t you, Mrs. Twistle?’ ‘He certainly wrote letters to someone called Stella, and she certainly died fairly young, but I’m afraid’  ‘I’m afraid quite naturally.’
‘Why, he was a dean, wasn’t he? Who ever heard of a dean murdering anybody, I'd like to know.’
‘If you'll forgive me for saying so, Mrs. Peters, I consider as how that is a very unfair idea. Because a gentleman is in high places, there’s some people as will never suspect him of doing anything he oughtn’t to. If it were Mr. Peters or Mr. Twistle now, it would be a very different story, no doubt.’
“Ow! Daddy murdering someone! That's a good one, I must say,’
'Mr. Peters is, after all, only flesh and blood, capable of ‘human passions like the rest,’
‘If the Dean did murder the lady, Mrs. Twistle, I suppose he was took up for it?”
‘He was not,’
‘Ow, now, that settles it that you’ve got it wrong,’ ‘Everybody knows that British justice is going to get you if you do a murder, no matter if you’re a dean or Archbishop of Canterbury. Wearing your collar back to front isn’t going to make no difference to British justice, Mrs. Twistle. Ow, no, very definitely not!’
‘Influence, no doubt, Mrs. Peters,’ ‘Influence has been responsible for saving many a gentleman from the common hangman's grave, as you might say. If it had been Mr. Peters, the noose would have been round his neck before the pore lady was cold.’
‘Dean Swift is buried in St. Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin,’ ‘So I'm afraid that shows, doesn’t it, that you've got things a litle.
‘With a tablet, I daresay,’ ‘I’m naming no names, but there’s plenty of gentlemen lying snug in Westminster Abbey this minute who ought by rights — excuse me, Madam — to be buried at the crossroads with a stake through their black hearts.’
‘My goodness, what a dreadful idea!’ 
‘Bolshie, I call it,’ 
'As I understand from Mr. Churchill that the Russian gentlemen are now our glorious allies, Mrs. Peters, the term “Bolshie” doesn’t quite imply any longer what I take it you was trying to imply, Mrs. Peters,’
‘Have you heard that little Mrs. Clark up at Tiggs Farm is expecting again?’

 