‘Which day do you go?’ ‘Wednesday’ ‘Wednesday’ 
‘I suppose you don’t know where you're going to be sent,’ ‘I know it has to be very secret nowadays, because of the submarines.’
‘I think it’s Syria,’ ‘From the stuffwe’re taking, I’m pretty certain.’
“You can’t be sure,’ “There’s a Mrs. Mason who’s come to live at the Cross Glens. You know, Adrian, where old Colonel Fox used to live. Well, Captain Mason went off with a topee and shorts, poor man, and the next thing she heard was that he was sitting up on a fiord in Iceland. It’s all done to put the spies on the wrong track. I'll point Mrs. Mason out to you in church tomorrow.’
‘It’s good of you to think of the old people when you've got so little time left,’ ‘so little time left’. ‘Four days, and one of them nearly gone.’
‘The black spot has been dreadful on the roses this year,’ ‘Really dreadful. What do you plan to do after he’s gone?”
‘I shall get a job,’ ‘I thought I might go into one of the services. Shorthand and typing ought to be useful. Anyway, I’m going to do something.’
‘That’s sensible,’ ‘After all, you'll be perfectly free, won’t you? It isn’t as though you have any ties.”
‘No, I've got no ties at all,’
‘Somehow, now that you're going I wish we'd had a child. You know, the Sonnets and all that — “And nothing ’gainst Time’s scythe can make defence, Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.”’
‘I'm not sorry,’ “This way I shan’t be missing anything. When I get back we'll have the fun of kids together.’
“Yes, we will,’ ‘How long do you think the war’s going to last?’ she asked, picking up her hairbrush.
‘Darling! As though it matters a damn what I think. I don’t know — maybe another couple of years or so.’
‘Some people say it will be over next spring.’
‘Some people talk a hell of a lot of nonsense,’ 
‘They were an awful long time demobilising people after the last war, weren't they?’ ‘Maybe the firm would make a special application for you, or whatever they do. After all, they'll be terribly anxious to get you back. Mr. Hobday told me himself that he didn’t know how they were going to get on without you.’
‘Oh, they'll manage,’ 
‘I'll get used to it, too,’ ‘Well, my boy! Just off, I hear,’ ‘Going East, I suppose? No, no, don’t tell me - mustn’t ask, mustn’t ask. Well, it looks like a big showdown there this winter. Hitler's going to try and break through. Yes, we've got to be prepared for heavy fighting, heavy fighting.’
‘The old fool,’ ‘John Tregarthen, who lost his life off Black Point, 10 December 1897,’ she read. ‘Samuel Cotter, drowned in the wreck of the Lady May, 25 January 1902.”
‘Hungry?’ ‘Damn that old idiot!’ ‘Darling, it’s going to be a quiet winter. What do you bet? We'll be stuck in some bloody desert, eating our heads off with boredom. We're going to be forgotten men, forgotten by Hitler, forgotten by the General Staff, forgotten by —
‘It’s all right,’
‘I’m glad Mke has turned up again. I want you to go out with him. That's why I said to him just now, “When I’m gone I'd take it as a personal favour ifyou’d give Ruth a ring now and then and take her out and give her a good time.”’
‘I don’t want to go out with Mike,’
‘Please do,’ ‘It will make me feel better to think of you looking pretty, out dancing and enjoying yourself.’
‘I don’t suppose I'll be able to wire you, but I'll give someone a letter to post from the port after we sail,’ “That will be fine.’ 
‘Well, take care of yourself,’ ‘Don't forget what we said last night. If the bombings start again, you go down to Cornwall, you go anywhere. Anyway, you get out of here. Promise? Otherwise I won't be able to keep my mind on this wan.
‘I promise,’ ‘Good-bye, my love.’
‘Darling,’ ‘I can’t begin to tell you—
‘Don't,’ ‘Don’t.’
‘Yes, it’s Wednesday, isn’t it? I knew he was going on Wednesday.’ ‘Oh, you British, you British!’ ‘Has he gone? Oh, you poor darling! But aren’t you terribly relieved it’s over?’ “Yes, it's Wednesday, isn’t it? I knew he was going to drown on Wednesday.”
‘After all, there are thousands of women going through what I’m going through and they don’t make a fuss.’ ‘Darling?’ ‘I’m at the station, I'll be right round. Got to the port, but something went wrong. We all waited, then the message came through that it was cancelled. I wasn't allowed to phone you.’
‘Cancelled?’ ‘You're not going?”
‘Not for another week,’ ‘Maybe ten days. God, what luck. I’m going out to find a taxi. Darling, don’t move until I get there.’
