‘Hello’.
‘Oh, darling,’ ‘I was afraid you might be at a conference or something.’
‘No, I’m not ata conference. What's the trouble, Barbara?’
‘This awful news!”
‘What? I don’t hear you very well.’
‘Tsaid this awful news,’
“Oh, well, it wasn’t entirely unexpected, was it?”
‘John, I’m so dreadfully worried about the children. I didn’t sleep a wink last night.’
‘I don’t think you need worry,’ he said. ‘I really don’t. From what we know of them, the Maddisons seem thoroughly good, solid people. I’m sure they'll look after the kids all right, whatever happens.’
“But it mayn’t be safe for them to stay with the Maddisons,’ ‘They may evacuate all the children from that area if things look bad. If only there was some way of getting at them!’
‘Well, there isn’t, I’m afraid. We can cable Mrs. Maddison, of course, and ask for news. Cables are going through without much delay,’
‘I suppose Germany’s going to declare war on them next.’
‘It certainly looks like it.’
‘I ought never to have allowed the children to go without Nanny. Never, never! Or I ought to have gone with them myself.’
“Now, darling! You know you didn’t want to leave your job in the W.VS.”
‘Oh, damn the W.VS.!’ 
‘Back for tea. If a cable comes over the telephone, take it down carefully.’ 
‘Oh, my dear, I've thought so much about you! Aren’t you worried sick about your Simon and Janet, right out there in the middle of it all?’ ‘I was only saying to Dick last night, “Thank goodness we didn’t send Brian and Peter over that time.” Somehow, I always felt one ought to keep them here, even when things looked so bad.’ ‘Oh, dear, Ay must say Ay see no end to it now, do you? Ay feel that it will be years and years. Ay do really, Mrs. Bristowe.’ 
‘Really!’ ‘I must say I do think this is careless! I'll never be able to match it — never. I suppose you don’t realise how impossible it is to get this sort of thing now? Mr. Bristowe has always been particularly fond of that tea service.’ 

‘I'm ever so sorry about the tea set, Madam,’ ‘I don't know how I could have been so clumsy, I’m sure. It must be because my mind's not on things on account of thinking about Rose.”
‘Rose?’
‘Our girl, Rose. The one that went for a nurse to Singapore. The news has given me a turn, as you might say. I don’t trust them yellow monkeys, them Japanese. They won't fight clean, I said to Prout.’
‘Look,’ ‘Go and get another cup and sit down and have a cup of tea with me. It'll do us good.’ ‘Excuse me’ ‘I’m sorry I was cross just now. The truth is I'm worried to death about my children, too. It’s horrid feeling that they’re in the war again, and without me this time.’
‘Tchk!’ ‘Well, Prout says it’s no good worrying. We can’t do anything, he says.’
‘So does Mr. Bristowe.’
‘I didn’t feel easy in my mind when Rose went, but she was all set on it. She looked nice in her uniform, I will say. White. Ever such a bother to keep clean, you'd think, but I suppose there’s not many smuts out there.’
“What I hope is that they don’t come in for any air raids,’ ‘Somehow, the thought of air raids there seems worse than air raids here — 1 don’t know why. Probably because we’re used to them. And Simon would mind. Janet is solid as a rock, but Simon would be frightened.’
‘Ar, poor little dear! Well, our Rose has never been frightened of anything. If she gets hold of any of them Japs, she'll tell them off all right. I can just hear her!’ 
‘Well, one of these days we'll all have a good laugh thinking of these times. You'll have your little pair back, Mrs. Bristowe, and we'll have our Rose, and Hitler and that nasty snake of an emperor will have the ropes round their necks, as they richly deserve. Until then, as Prout says, there’s nothing to do but get on with it.’ ‘My word, I'll have to do the blackout and pop home, or else Prout will be thinking I’ve met one of them soldiers in a dark lane.”
‘Just off,’ she said. ‘Sure you're all right, Madam?’ 
‘Quite all right,’ 
‘That you, Barbara? It struck me that I wasn’t as sympathetic as I might have been this morning, darling. Ancaster was in the room and it happened to be — anyway, I’m sorry I was terse.’
‘I'm sorry I hung up on you.’
‘I thought you’d like to know that I’ve sent a long cable to the Maddisons. We ought to hear pretty soon, I should think.’ ‘Until then, my dear, chin up and keep smiling, won't you?’
‘I'll try. All we can do is get on with it, I suppose.’
‘Exactly,’ ‘Just what I said this morning. Well, darling, I'll try to get down midweek if the old boy isn’t tiresome. Ring me if the Maddisons’ answer comes before then, won't you?
