‘You needn't worry,’ ‘They're down at the pub.’
‘Thank God for that!’
‘Well?’b‘How did they take it?’
‘Perfectly all right,’  ‘They didn’t even seem surprised.’ “When are they —”
“The day after tomorrow. Roger says he’s due for a week's leave anyway, and they think they'll go off to Wales and fish. Then they’re going to try and get the Murdochs to lend them their studio for a bit.’
“Trust Roger to try and get something on the cheap. ‘Thursday! My God, I can hardly believe it.’ ‘I couldn't keep my mind on anything today. There was a conference this afternoon, rather an important one. All through it I kept on thinking, what the hell shall we do if they dig their toes in and say they won’t go?’
“It was easy, really,’ ‘I broke it to Madeline this morning when at last she condescended to get herself out of bed and come downstairs. She was scratching round here making herself some coffee when I did it. I said, “Oh, Mad, Gregory and I feel like beasts, but we've got to ask you and Roger to turn out. Gregory’s sister Penelope and her children are coming over from Ireland, and they haven't got another place to go except us.”
‘It sounds a bit fishy,’ ‘They know Penelope and I can’t stand the sight of each other. However, I expect you put it over all right. What did she say?”
‘She said, “Of course, my dear, That was in the arrange- ment when we came here. You promised to let us know when anything like that turned up.” All very reasonable, I must say. It made me feel rather dreadful. Then, when Roger got back this evening, she sidetracked him upstairs and told him. I heard their voices for ages when I was picking the raspberries. Then they came down, and Roger said about Wales and the Murdochs’ studio, and they went off to the pub.”
‘Leaving you picking the raspberries, ‘Of course. If that bitch had ever done a hand's turn around here to help you, things might have been very different.’
‘Oh, I'd really rather do it,’ ‘You know the fuss. Besides, they're not going to eat these raspberries, are they?’
‘No, by God, they're not,’ ‘Now that they're going —’ He stopped and repeated the words, as though he were rolling them on the tongue like some rare old vintage. ‘Now that they're going, it’s amusing to try and decide what got us down worst. Do you know, with me I think it’s Roger’s habit of handing me the vegetables at meals. Handing them to me as though I were a guest in my own house, mark you.’
‘The way Mad leaves the bathroom!’ ‘It certainly will be nice to go in and not find clouds of powder over the glass, everything swimming in water, and the lavatory jammed with face tissues.’
‘It will also be pleasant to turn the radio to the programme we want for a change,’  ‘I've got two bars ‘of chocolate in here that little shop off the Strand had some in today.’
‘Darling, how lovely! We'll eat it when we go to bed.’
‘Soon we'll be able to eat it when and where we like,’ ‘Well, I’m going to change. You know, it’s indescribable how different the house feels when they're out of it.’ 
‘Next year,’ ‘we must find room for more carrots and cut out the turnips. Neither Mad nor I like turnips.’
‘Well, it’s partly the way Roger begins every other sentence with “In point of fact”, and Mad talks brightly at breakfast, and Roger is always in the lavatory when I go there, and he gets our bottles of gin mixed, and Mad rings up friends of hers in Cheshire or somewhere and forgets to pay for the calls.’ 
‘In point of fact,’ ‘poor Laura’s nothing but an Andromeda of the sink, with no Perseus in sight. A certain amount of household toil is inevitable in these days, but is it necessary to make quite such a tiresomely conspicuous sacrifice of oneself?’ 
“Typical Gregory,’ ‘Just as we were saying. Charming when you don’t have to live with it, no doubt.’ He picked up the hat and put it carefully on the table just as Laura came out of the kitchen and said, “There you are, you two.’
“Yes, here we are,’
‘In point of fact, the train journey is a bit of a sweat,’ “Thanks, Roger,’
‘I suppose you'll want old Carter and his taxi to take your stuff to the station on Thursday,’ 
“I suppose so,’
‘I hope it will come off all right Thursday,’
“It will come off all right,’ ‘Don’t you worry.’ 
‘Roger? Look, what are you and Mad doing tonight?’