‘Know what I think, Birch?’ ‘Know what? It’s about time you had some leave. Ask Danvers for some, go off down to the country and find a cow to look at, and for God’s sake relax. If you don’t, you’re for the ministry heebie-jeebies — in plain English, darling, a breakdown. Heavens, I must fly!’ 
‘I’ve got your Player’s this evening, but only loose — no packets. Will that do?”
‘My goodness, how your plant has grown! It’s really a beauty now,’ ‘Yes, it’s doing well, isn’t it?’ 
‘Evening,’ ‘Having a lovely bit of weather, aren't we?’
‘Lovely,’ 
‘It’s a wonder the whole place didn’t come down, and that’s a fact,’
‘Here you are, dear. Pop ’em in your bag. They're short, but if we don’t get our smokes to quiet our nerves we'll all go balmy, more than likely.’
‘But if we didn’t phone we'll never get a table.’ ‘You're right, Miss Birch. ‘There's nothing like the old fellows for keeping one’s mind off the fellows up there,’ ‘Pickwick seems to make 'em unimportant, somehow.’ ‘Evening’
‘Do you know, I’ve been meaning and meaning to ring you,’ ‘Hello’ 
‘This is something like!’ ‘Don’t worry, my dear girl, it’s nothing,’‘I might have known that you’d be the woman to read William Blake,’
‘Why — come in!’ ‘Oh, please don’t bother to get smartened up for me! It’s quite warm this evening, isn’t it?”
‘Feels to me as though we're going to get a bit of thunder,’ ‘Sit down, won't you? I was just . . .’ 
‘Do go on,’ ‘I do hope you don’t mind my dropping in informally like this. As a matter of fact, I haven't a thing to read, and I wondered if you'd very kindly lend me a book.”
‘Help yourself,’ ‘I don’t know that you'll find anything much there, but you're welcome.”
‘You know, I always think of you as a bookish sort of person, Remember our talks about Dickens and Thackeray and Trollope in the old blitz days.’
‘Oh, those,’ ‘Well, thank God that time’s a long way back now. Seems like a nightmare, doesn’t it? I don’t believe we'll ever get em coming over like that again, either.’
‘Oh, I hope not,’
‘Might I borrow this?’‘Any time you want to borrow another, just pop along,’
‘It’s the reaction,’‘You can’t go through month after month of that and not get a reaction sometime.’