“There’s already more than you and I can do here,’ ‘and the days of sitting in drawing-rooms are over, for the moment, anyway. We're all too busy.”
‘If we could get a couple of housemaids from the village, that would be something,’ said Dossie sourly. ‘But there are no girls left. They're all in the Waafs or something like that, larking about, getting into mischief with their bobbed heads and their lipstick and all. They'll want sobering down before anyone will take them into good private service after the war, Madam, and no mistake.”
‘Maybe they won’t want to be taken,’ ‘Until they do, you and I will have to crawl round as best we can, Dossie. That’s the last packing case. Boxall can come in and take it down to the cellars.’
‘Well,’ ‘it’s nota bad thing, with the birth rate the way itis. They’re fine young men, the Canadians. You don't want England populated with nothing but old crocks like you and me, do you?'
‘Good afternoon,’ ‘Hiya, Miss Dossie!’ ‘Hiya, sweetheart!’‘Say, your Mrs. Walsingham is certainly a grand old guy. We think she’s swell, the way she stumps around and runs this big old place without any help. Reminds me a lot of my Aunt Katie on the ranch at home.’
‘Yeah,’ ‘yeah, Queen Mary. She’s another grand old guy.’
‘I can’t carry a tray, with my stick, and you'll fall flat on your face if you try,’ ‘but we can both push things,’ ‘Dossie, you’re a pearl among women! This soufflé is even better than the one last week. It’s great, isn’t it, Mrs. Walsingham?’  ‘Thank you, sir,’
“Less way to carry the food. Warmer, too, in the winter. At my age, I'd rather be warm in here than grand in there with a rug over my knees.’ 
‘It’s out of place now,’ ‘It’s ridiculous for an old woman to dress herself up every night when thousands of young men are being bombed and killed and when thousands more ‘people are starving all over Europe.’
‘I'm sure I don’t know why a lady shouldn't look nice even if they are,’
“Well, ifyou can’t understand that,’ ‘perhaps you can understand that it’s chilly in the evenings without the central heating. I don’t want to take things off, my good woman, I want to put them on. If you must put out something, put out my tweed shooting cape.’
“You'll be using the dining-room while the Colonel is with us, I take it, Madam,’ 
‘Why?’ ‘He'll be much more comfortable in the kitchen — always used to like going in there as a little boy, you remember. And I don’t suppose he’s accustomed to have things very formal in the desert.’
“No, Madam,
‘I had no idea that Dossie could cook,’
‘She hadn't either,’ ‘She’s an invaluable creature in lots of ways. Her trouble is that she hates adjusting to the war and she doesn’t like me to adjust, either. She has always refused to adjust to anything. I sometimes think that if there’s ever a social revolution in England, they'll string Dossie up first before they bother about me.’
‘They've cut down some of the trees,’
‘They had to, to put up some of their paraphernalia,’ “They were very nice about it. Do you mind, Edward? To tell you the truth, I think it’ — lets in more light and air. It’s altered the view from this side an improvement of the house, but what’s a view? Everything else is changing so fast I suppose we shouldn't bother about trees and water.
“The whisky-and-soda are in the library, sir,’ ‘Do you wish me to call you at eight o'clock, as usual?’
‘Yes call me at eight, will you, Dossie?’