‘Nonsense, Doris, you do it much better,’
‘I second that,’
“Well, if I could have Lois to help me,’ ‘I mean it’s going to be quite a big job. It will take two of us easily.’
‘Inever did have any brains, you know that, Alice.’
‘Then that’s carried unanimously!’ ‘Mrs. Carver has kindly promised to be our officer-in-charge, with Miss Lois Pringle as her second-in-command. Although this is such an informal meeting, I think someone ought to take a few notes, don’t you?’
‘Before we go any further, we've got to decide what work we're going to do and where we're going to do it,’ ‘I've been to see one or two people about it already. Lois and I drove in to Sherbury this morning to see Mrs. Peters, the Regional Organiser, and I must say that what she had to say was rather upsetting. In the first place, if we want to make any surgical dressings at all, we must supply a room which can be passed as completely sterile by the medical authorities. Walls and floor washed down every time it’s been used, you know, and all that nonsense. “If you insist on a room like that,” I said to Mrs. Peters, “you won't get a single splint made in any village the length and breadth of England.” I said to her, “In the last war my sister and I made surgical swabs by the thousand just in Mrs. Robertson’s drawing-room - and there wasn’t anything particularly sterile about that.” “Well,” said Mrs. Peters, “I quite see your point, Mrs. Carver, and I can’t say that I’m not in sympathy with you, but those at the minute are the orders from headquarters.”
‘How about the stage at the Village Hall?’ ‘It’s nice and bare, and I suppose we could get it scrubbed after we used it.’
‘My dear, think of the germs in those curtains,’ ‘All the children acting scenes from As You Like It and simply septic with colds and chicken pox. I really don’t think it would be awfully good. How about the big playroom at the Dysons’?’
‘There’s the room at The George,’
‘Good gracious, Lois! You don’t want the dressings to reek of beer, do you?’
‘Well, if it’s quite agreed that we are unable to produce a pure room in this village,’ ‘I should like to say that Miss Judd has kindly offered her drawing-room and study for the use of the working party. It’s got a lot to recommend it. It’s central -’
‘That’s another thing,’ ‘Now that we haven’t got the petrol, you've got to think how people are going to get in to the Depot.’
‘Not in the least,’ “Let her have an offshoot by all means. Let’s hear more about Miss Judd’s drawing-room. I can’t remember if it’s got cupboards or not. In the last war we used to put the work away in cardboard boxes, but in this war I suppose we'll have to be a good deal more fussy.’
‘I think we’ll have to start a little subscription for lighting and heating,’ 
‘Yes, we'll have to have some sort of heating,’ agreed Mrs. Carver.
‘It’s wonderful, though, how the dahlias kept on,’ , ‘They were a sight this year. Our Jane Cowls are really a picture, only we them a little difficult to keep from year to year I don’t know why.’
‘If no other lady has any more questions to ask, I almost think we might adjourn.”
‘Then I'll ring up Lady Buxton tonight about her offshoot!’ 
‘Do!’ ‘I know she'll be helpful.”
‘It’s a long way to Tipperar-ee —"
‘Of course it’s nonsense!’ Mrs. Carver was shouting into the telephone. ‘I said to Mrs. Peters that you’d never find a perfectly antiseptic room in any village. “In the last war,” I said to her -’
‘But my heart's right there!’ 