‘Ever so quiet, isn’t it?’ ‘Might be miles and miles from everything, really, instead of only ten minutes’ walk from the village.’ “That's what we like about the house,’ ‘Well, everyone to his taste, of course,’
‘Still waters run deep,’ “There’s no knowing with those quiet types, is there? I suppose I didn’t ought to have married Harold, really. When I had my figure, there were no heights I couldn't have attempted, the variety stage included.’ ‘Well, you've got your children as compensation,’ ‘My God, that woman!’ ‘She’s a shocker. You'll have to get rid of her, Mother. Ring up Miss Sykes and say they'll have to find her another billet.’
‘I've rung up Nancy Sykes until I’m tired of it,’ ‘She always says that this is the only house that can take them all, and she prefers not to split up families. Sometimes I think they’re here forever.’
‘I daresay the place will seem ever so funny without us,’
‘Mrs. Dudley? My name is Rachel Craig, and I'ma friend of your daughter-in-law’s. Peg said that you wouldn’t mind my coming along to see you.’
‘Do come in, won't you?’ ‘And forgive my looking so untidy. Peg may have told you that, like most people these days, we've got no servants at all. Are you staying somewhere down here?”
‘No,’ ‘That's just the point. I’m not staying down here, but I want to be. Peg thought that you might be able to help.”
‘How lovely to see a real home again, after all the furnished lodgings I've been in,’ ‘I suppose some time George and I will have a home of our own.’ “He's been stationed down here, at the camp over at Fairfield,’ ‘Of course he doesn’t know for how long I've been trying to get rooms somewhere near for me and Evelyn — that’s my baby — but everywhere is so full up with evacuees and things, isn’t it? Anyway, I was nearly despairing, and then I ran into Peg in London yesterday, and she said perhaps you'd be willing to take us as paying guests.’
‘Look here, I’m alone and in peace for the first time in four years. I’m sick to death of strangers in my house. Won't you please go away?’‘I’m sorry. I'd like to help you out, but I simply haven't the room.’
‘Evelyn and I would tuck up in any corner,’  ‘You wouldn't know we were here, really. She’s a very good baby.’
‘I’d be awfully glad to help with the house. I'ma good cook — or George used to think so. You see, if only we could be somewhere not too far away, so that he could see us sometimes, before he gets sent goodness knows where, it will make all the difference.’
‘I do feel so sorry for all you young people and I wish I could have managed it. But there it is. It’s really too bad of Peg to send you down on a wild-goose chase like this.’
