‘Ow, terrible!’ ‘I always say to him, “Daddy,” I say, “one might as well put one’s feet up against a frog.” 
‘The Greeks!’ ‘Ow, what an original idea!’ 
“There are heads in high places, Madam, as should be rolling on Tower Hill’ or ‘If I had my way, there are plenty of gentlemen in the present government who I would like - excuse me, Madam - to take out and shoot against a wall.’ ‘I suppose, Madam, that the Greek gentlemen would be wearing pyjamas? In the photographs they're always in little, short sort of petticoat affairs.’
‘Oh dear, Mrs. Twistle! It would be terrible if we sent our lovely pyjamas and then they didn’t wear them!’ 
“Ow, not in bed! They wouldn't wear their petticoats in bed!’
‘Hem this sleeve, Elsie,’ ‘Hark at us all arguing when Mrs. Ramsay can tell us!’ 
‘Greeks!’ ‘Well, wait until I tell Daddy! He'll have a good laugh at me stitching away for the Greeks. Kind of little men, aren’t they?’ She held up the trousers again. ‘I suppose these are going to fit them?’
‘Well, poor fellows, it must be bitterly cold up on those mountains,’ ‘It’s sort of nice to think that our pyjamas are going to keep them warm. And when you think how splendid they're being, chasing off that nasty Mussolini — Mrs Twistle coughed gently again and remarked with implacable softness that the Greeks were very marvellous, no doubt, but in her opinion it was a pity that England had to have foreign allies monkeying about with her war.
‘Ow well, I’m not all that narrow-minded,’ ‘After all, if you have allies, they’ve got to be foreign. Stands to reason. And as Daddy says, it’s not the poor things’ fault that they can’t speak the King’s English proper. We should look nice fools, Mrs. Twistle, parleyvooing in Athens, no doubt. May I trouble you for the box of pins, Mrs. Garner? I thank you.”
“There’s no doubt, Mrs. Peters, that they’re a fine lot of men. It’s only that if I had my way, we’d have nothing to do with foreigners. We're better off without them, though there are those in high places, I’m well aware, as don’t see eye to eye.”
‘Ow, and how about the Americans?’ ‘I suppose you're going to tell me that if they wanted to come over and help us, you wouldn’t let them, on account of them being, as you might say, foreigners.’
‘I would not,’
‘Ready for buttons!’
‘I'm sure I don’t want to contradict you, Mrs. Twistle,’ ‘but I must say I think you're wrong. Daddy says that if the Americans came over and fought, we'd have the Nasties beaten before the end of the year.’
‘How lovely that would be,’
‘In my opinion, Mrs. Peters,’ ‘we should have been better off without the Americans in the last war, if it comes to that.’
‘Ow, now, really, Mrs. Twistle!’ Mrs. Peters laughed in a superior way. ‘Everyone knows that if they hadn’t come in when they did, we should have lost the war. And they was a splendid lot of young men. Daddy says —’
“With all due respect to Mr. Peters,’ ‘Your Grace, the tumbril waits’ - ‘with ail due respect, splendid no doubt they was, but uncommon late they was also. By the time they arrived, our boys had done all the work, Mrs. Peters, and there was nothing for them to do. Mr. Twistle always says the same.”
‘Ow, there was nothing for them to do, wasn’t there?’ ‘What about the battles they was in? What about the American war memorial? I suppose they put that up just in memory of the trip across the Atlantic, Mrs. Twistle? Daddy could tell you a very different story. He was right beside the American boys in France, and he says they fought like hellcats, Mrs. Twistle. If you don’t mind my saying so, I think Daddy might be allowed to know better than Mr. Twistle, who wasn’t never there. Like hellcats, he said, and you can put that in your pipe and smoke it, Mrs. Twistle. Ow, yes!’
‘Pardon me, Mrs. Peters, but my ‘usband was there,’ ‘My ’usband was in France from 1915 to 1918.’
‘Ow, but behind the lines, Mrs. Twistle, behind the lines,’ ‘Daddy was in the lines all the time.’
‘How are chickens laying, Mrs. Twistle? Mine are right off — all the mucky stuff they put in the chicken food nowadays, likely.’
‘Thank you, Mrs. Dogberry, but I can’t complain. My little pullets are giving me my steady five.’
‘I passed by your place the other afternoon, Mrs. Twistle, and I thought those Light Sussex birds of yours were looking real lovely.’
‘They’re nice,’ ‘but they don’t give the brown eggs like your Rhode Island Reds do, Mrs. Peters.’
When the compliments had died down, Mrs. Ramsay asked cautiously, ‘Then it’s agreed? We'll send the next lot of pyjamas to the Greeks?’
‘Ow, yes, send them to the Greeks by all means,’ ‘It'll be a nice change for them to get their limbs into something cosy after those little skirts, poor lads.’
‘I think it would be ever so nice, Madam,’ ‘After all, they’re doing very wonderfully, aren’t they? If those in high places don’t see that we help them as much as possible, there’s heads as will certainly roll when the voice of the people is heard. May I trouble you for the loan of your scissors, Mrs. Peters?”
‘Help yourself, Mrs. Twistle,’